ALSO BY GREGORY ZUCKERMAN
For Adult Readers:

The Frackers
The Greatest Trade Ever
For Young Readers:

Rising Above
Rising Above: Inspiring Women in Sports

Portfolio / Penguin
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
penguinrandomhouse.com

Copyright © 2019 by Gregory Zuckerman
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices,
promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an
authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not
reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission.
You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for
every reader.
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following
photographs:
1: Courtesy of Lee Neuwirth © Lee Neuwirth
2: Courtesy of Seth Rumshinsky
3: Photo by Rick Mott, taken at the NJ Open Go Tournament, provided with
permission, courtesy of Stefi Baum
4, 5: Courtesy of Brian Keating
6: Courtesy of David Eisenbud
7: Courtesy of Wall Street Journal and Jenny Strasburg
8: Patrick McMullan/Getty Images
ISBN 9780735217980 (hardcover)
ISBN 9780735217997 (ebook)
ISBN 9780593086315 (international edition)
Jacket design: Karl Spurzem
Jacket image: (equations) Virtualphoto / Getty Images

Version_1

CONTENTS
Also by Gregory Zuckerman
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Cast of Characters
A Timeline of Key Events
Introduction
Prologue

PART ONE
Money Isn’t Everything
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven

PART TWO
Money Changes Everything
Chapter Twelve
Chapter Thirteen
Chapter Fourteen

Chapter Fifteen
Chapter Sixteen
Epilogue
Photographs
Acknowledgments
Appendices
Notes
Index
About the Author

To Gabriel and Elijah
My signals in the noise

CAST OF CHARACTERS
James Simons

Mathematician, code breaker, and founder of
Renaissance Technologies
Lenny Baum

Simons’s first investing partner and author of algorithms
that impacted the lives of millions
James Ax

Ran the Medallion fund and developed its first trading
models
Sandor Straus

Data guru who played key early role at Renaissance
Elwyn Berlekamp

Game theorist who managed the Medallion fund at a key
turning point
Henry Laufer

Mathematician who moved Simons’s fund toward shortterm trades
Peter Brown

Computer scientist who helped engineer Renaissance’s
key breakthroughs
Robert Mercer

Renaissance’s co-CEO, helped put Donald Trump in the
White House
Rebekah Mercer

Teamed up with Steve Bannon to upend American
politics

David Magerman

Computer specialist who tried to stop the Mercers’
political activities

A TIMELINE OF KEY EVENTS
1938

Jim Simons born
1958

Simons graduates MIT
1964

Simons becomes code breaker at the IDA
1968

Simons leads math department at Stony Brook
University
1974

Simons and Chern publish groundbreaking paper
1978

Simons leaves academia to start Monemetrics, a
currency trading firm, and a hedge fund called Limroy
1979

Lenny Baum and James Ax join
1982

Firm’s name changes to Renaissance Technologies
Corporation
1984

Baum quits
1985

Ax and Straus move the company to California
1988

Simons shuts down Limroy, launches the Medallion fund

1989

Ax leaves, Elwyn Berlekamp leads Medallion
1990

Berlekamp departs, Simons assumes control of the firm
and fund
1992

Henry Laufer becomes full-time employee
1993

Peter Brown and Robert Mercer join
1995

Brown, Mercer achieve key breakthrough
2000

Medallion soars 98.5 percent
2005

Renaissance Institutional Equities Fund launches
2007

Renaissance and other quant firms suffer sudden losses
2010

Brown and Mercer take over firm
2017

Mercer steps down as co-CEO

INTRODUCTION

Y

ou do know—no one will speak with you, right?”

I was picking at a salad at a fish restaurant in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, in early September 2017,
trying my best to get a British mathematician named
Nick Patterson to open up about his former company,
Renaissance Technologies. I wasn’t having much luck.
I told Patterson that I wanted to write a book about
how James Simons, Renaissance’s founder, had created
the greatest moneymaking machine in financial history.
Renaissance generated so much wealth that Simons and
his colleagues had begun to wield enormous influence in
the worlds of politics, science, education, and
philanthropy. Anticipating dramatic societal shifts,
Simons harnessed algorithms, computer models, and big
data before Mark Zuckerberg and his peers had a chance
to finish nursery school.
Patterson wasn’t very encouraging. By then, Simons
and his representatives had told me they weren’t going to
provide much help, either. Renaissance executives and
others close to Simons—even those I once considered
friends—wouldn’t return my calls or emails. Even
archrivals begged out of meetings at Simons’s request, as
if he was a Mafia boss they dared not offend.
Over and over, I was reminded of the iron-clad,
thirty-page nondisclosure agreements the firm forced
employees to sign, preventing even retirees from
divulging much. I got it, guys. But come on. I’d been at
the Wall Street Journal for a couple of decades; I knew
how the game was played. Subjects, even recalcitrant
ones, usually come around. After all, who doesn’t want a

book written about them? Jim Simons and Renaissance
Technologies, apparently.
I wasn’t entirely shocked. Simons and his team are
among the most secretive traders Wall Street has
encountered, loath to drop even a hint of how they’d
conquered financial markets, lest a competitor seize on
any clue. Employees avoid media appearances and steer
clear of industry conferences and most public gatherings.
Simons once quoted Benjamin, the donkey in Animal
Farm, to explain his attitude: “‘God gave me a tail to
keep off the flies. But I’d rather have had no tail and no
flies.’ That’s kind of the way I feel about publicity.”1
I looked up from my meal and forced a smile.
This is going to be a battle.
I kept at it, probing defenses, looking for openings.
Writing about Simons and learning his secrets became
my fixation. The obstacles he put up only added allure to
the chase.
There were compelling reasons I was determined to
tell Simons’s story. A former math professor, Simons is
arguably the most successful trader in the history of
modern finance. Since 1988, Renaissance’s flagship
Medallion hedge fund has generated average annual
returns of 66 percent, racking up trading profits of more
than $100 billion (see Appendix 1 for how I arrive at
these numbers). No one in the investment world comes
close. Warren Buffett, George Soros, Peter Lynch, Steve
Cohen, and Ray Dalio all fall short (see Appendix 2).
In recent years, Renaissance has been scoring over
$7 billion annually in trading gains. That’s more than the
annual revenues of brand-name corporations including
Under Armour, Levi Strauss, Hasbro, and Hyatt Hotels.
Here’s the absurd thing—while those other companies
have tens of thousands of employees, there are just three
hundred or so at Renaissance.

I’ve determined that Simons is worth about $23
billion, making him wealthier than Elon Musk of Tesla
Motors, Rupert Murdoch of News Corp, and Laurene
Powell Jobs, Steve Jobs’s widow. Others at the firm are
also billionaires. The average Renaissance employee has
nearly $50 million just in the firm’s own hedge funds.
Simons and his team truly create wealth in the manner of
fairy tales full of kings, straw, and lots and lots of gold.
More than the trading successes intrigued me. Early
on, Simons made a decision to dig through mountains of
data, employ advanced mathematics, and develop
cutting-edge computer models, while others were still
relying on intuition, instinct, and old-fashioned research
for their own predictions. Simons inspired a revolution
that has since swept the investing world. By early 2019,
hedge funds and other quantitative, or quant, investors
had emerged as the market’s largest players, controlling
about 30 percent of stock trading, topping the activity of
both individual investors and traditional investing
firms.2 MBAs once scoffed at the thought of relying on a
scientific and systematic approach to investing,
confident they could hire coders if they were ever
needed. Today, coders say the same about MBAs, if they
think about them at all.
Simons’s pioneering methods have been embraced in
almost every industry, and reach nearly every corner of
everyday life. He and his team were crunching statistics,
turning tasks over to machines, and relying on
algorithms more than three decades ago—long before
these tactics were embraced in Silicon Valley, the halls of
government, sports stadiums, doctors’ offices, military
command centers, and pretty much everywhere else
forecasting is required.
Simons developed strategies to corral and manage
talent, turning raw brainpower and mathematical
aptitude into astonishing wealth. He made money from

math, and a lot of money, at that. A few decades ago, it
wasn’t remotely possible.
Lately, Simons has emerged as a modern-day Medici,
subsidizing the salaries of thousands of public-school
math and science teachers, developing autism
treatments, and expanding our understanding of the
origins of life. His efforts, while valuable, raise the
question of whether one individual should enjoy so much
influence. So, too, does the clout of his senior executive,*
Robert Mercer, who is perhaps the individual most
responsible for Donald Trump’s presidential victory in
2016. Mercer, Trump’s biggest financial supporter,
plucked Steve Bannon and Kellyanne Conway from
obscurity and inserted them into the Trump campaign,
stabilizing it during a difficult period. Companies
formerly owned by Mercer and now in the hands of his
daughter Rebekah played key roles in the successful
campaign to encourage the United Kingdom to leave the
European Union. Simons, Mercer, and others at
Renaissance will continue to have broad impact for years
to come.
The successes of Simons and his team prompt a
number of challenging questions. What does it say about
financial markets that mathematicians and scientists are
better at predicting their direction than veteran investors
at the largest traditional firms? Do Simons and his
colleagues enjoy a fundamental understanding of
investing that eludes the rest of us? Do Simons’s
achievements prove human judgment and intuition are
inherently flawed, and that only models and automated
systems can handle the deluge of data that seems to
overwhelm us? Do the triumph and popularity of
Simons’s quantitative methods create new, overlooked
risks?
I was most fascinated by a striking paradox: Simons
and his team shouldn’t have been the ones to master the
market. Simons never took a single finance class, didn’t

care very much for business, and, until he turned forty,
only dabbled in trading. A decade later, he still hadn’t
made much headway. Heck, Simons didn’t even do
applied mathematics, he did theoretical math, the most
impractical kind. His firm, located in a sleepy town on
the North Shore of Long Island, hires mathematicians
and scientists who don’t know anything about investing
or the ways of Wall Street. Some are even outright
suspicious of capitalism. Yet, Simons and his colleagues
are the ones who changed the way investors approach
financial markets, leaving an industry of traders,
investors, and other pros in the dust. It’s as if a group of
tourists, on their first trip to South America, with a few
odd-looking tools and meager provisions, discovered El
Dorado and proceeded to plunder the golden city, as
hardened explorers looked on in frustration.
Finally, I hit my own pay dirt. I learned about
Simons’s early life, his tenure as a groundbreaking
mathematician and Cold War code-breaker, and the
volatile early period of his firm. Contacts shared details
about Renaissance’s most important breakthroughs as
well as recent events featuring more drama and intrigue
than I had imagined. Eventually, I conducted more than
four hundred interviews with more than thirty current
and former Renaissance employees. I spoke with an even
larger number of Simons’s friends, family members, and
others who participated in, or were familiar with, the
events I describe. I owe deep gratitude to each individual
who spent time sharing memories, observations, and
insights. Some accepted substantial personal risk to help
me tell this story. I hope I rewarded their faith.
Even Simons spoke with me, eventually. He asked
me not to write this book and never truly warmed to the
project. But Simons was gracious enough to spend more
than ten hours discussing certain periods of his life,
while refusing to discuss Renaissance’s trading and most

other activities. His thoughts were valuable and
appreciated.
This book is a work of nonfiction. It is based on firstperson accounts and recollections of those who
witnessed or were aware of the events I depict. I
understand that memories fade, so I’ve done my best to
check and confirm every fact, incident, and quote.
I’ve tried to tell Simons’s story in a way that will
appeal to the general reader as well as to professionals in
quantitative finance and mathematics. I will refer to
hidden Markov models, kernel methods of machine
learning, and stochastic differential equations, but there
also will be broken marriages, corporate intrigue, and
panicked traders.
For all his insights and prescience, Simons was
blindsided by much that took place in his life. That may
be the most enduring lesson of his remarkable story.

PROLOGUE

J

im Simons wouldn’t stop calling.

It was the fall of 1990 and Simons was in his office
on the thirty-third floor of a midtown Manhattan highrise, his eyes glued to a computer screen flashing the
latest moves in global financial markets. Friends didn’t
understand why Simons was still at it. Fifty-two years
old, Simons had already lived a full life, enjoying enough
adventure, accomplishment, and prosperity to satisfy the
ambitions of his peers. Yet, there he was, overseeing an
investment fund, sweating the market’s daily eruptions.
Simons stood nearly five foot ten, though a slight
stoop and a head of graying, thinning hair suggested
someone a bit shorter and older. Creases enveloped his
brown eyes, the likely result of a smoking habit he
couldn’t kick—or just didn’t want to. Simons’s rugged,
craggy features, and the glint of mischief in his eyes,
reminded friends of the late actor Humphrey Bogart.
On Simons’s uncluttered desk sat an oversize ashtray
awaiting the next flick of his burning cigarette. On his
wall was a rather gruesome painting of a lynx feasting on
a rabbit. Nearby, on a coffee table next to a couch and
two comfortable leather chairs, sat a complicated
mathematics research paper, a reminder of the thriving
academic career Simons had discarded to the
bewilderment of his fellow mathematicians.
By then, Simons had spent twelve full years
searching for a successful investing formula. Early on, he
traded like others, relying on intuition and instinct, but
the ups and downs left Simons sick to his stomach. At
one point, Simons became so discouraged an employee

worried he was contemplating suicide. Simons recruited
two renowned and headstrong mathematicians to trade
with him, but those partnerships crumbled amid losses
and acrimony. A year earlier, Simons’s results had been
so awful he had been forced to halt his investing. Some
expected him to pull the plug on his entire operation.
Now on his second marriage and third business
partner, Simons decided to embrace a radical investing
style. Working with Elwyn Berlekamp, a game theorist,
Simons built a computer model capable of digesting
torrents of data and selecting ideal trades, a scientific
and systematic approach partly aimed at removing
emotion from the investment process.
“If we have enough data, I know we can make
predictions,” Simons told a colleague.
Those closest to Simons understood what really was
driving him. Simons had earned a PhD at the age of
twenty-three and then became an acclaimed government
code-breaker, a renowned mathematician, and a
groundbreaking university administrator. He needed a
new challenge and a bigger canvas. Simons told a friend
that solving the market’s age-old riddle and conquering
the world of investing “would be remarkable.” He wanted
to be the one to use math to beat the market. If he could
pull it off, Simons knew he could make millions of
dollars, maybe even more, perhaps enough to influence
the world beyond Wall Street, which some suspected was
his true goal.
In trading, as in mathematics, it’s rare to achieve
breakthroughs in midlife. Yet, Simons was convinced he
was on the verge of something special, maybe even
historic. A Merit cigarette lodged between two fingers,
Simons reached for the phone to call Berlekamp one
more time.
“Have you seen gold?” Simons asked, the accent of
his gravelly voice hinting at his Boston upbringing.

Yes, I’ve seen gold prices, Berlekamp responded.
And, no, we don’t need to adjust our trading system.
Simons didn’t push, hanging up politely, as usual.
Berlekamp was becoming exasperated by Simons’s
pestering, however. Serious and slim with blue eyes
behind thick glasses, Berlekamp worked on the other
side of the country in an office that was a short walk from
the campus of University of California, Berkeley, where
he continued to teach. When Berlekamp discussed his
trading with graduates of the university’s business
school, they sometimes mocked the methods he and
Simons had embraced, calling them “quackery.”
“Oh, come on. Computers can’t compete with human
judgment,” one had told Berlekamp.
“We’re gonna do things better than humans can,”
Berlekamp responded.
Privately, Berlekamp understood why their approach
screamed of modern-day alchemy. Even he couldn’t fully
explain why their model was recommending certain
trades.
It wasn’t just on campus where Simons’s ideas
seemed out of touch. A golden age for traditional
investing had dawned as George Soros, Peter Lynch, Bill
Gross, and others divined the direction of investments,
financial markets, and global economies, producing
enormous profits with intelligence, intuition, and oldfashioned economic and corporate research. Unlike his
rivals, Simons didn’t have a clue how to estimate cash
flows, identify new products, or forecast interest rates.
He was digging through reams of price information.
There wasn’t even a proper name for this kind of trading,
which involved data cleansing, signals, and backtesting,
terms most Wall Street pros were wholly unfamiliar with.
Few used email in 1990, the internet browser hadn’t
been invented, and algorithms were best known, if at all,
as the step-by-step procedures that had enabled Alan
Turing’s machine to break coded Nazi messages during

World War II. The idea that these formulas might guide,
or even help govern, the day-to-day lives of hundreds of
millions of individuals, or that a couple of former math
professors might employ computers to trounce seasoned
and celebrated investors, seemed far-fetched if not
outright ludicrous.
Simons was upbeat and confident by nature, though.
He detected early signs of success for his computer
system, sparking hope. Besides, Simons didn’t have a lot
of options. His once-thriving venture investments
weren’t going anywhere, and he sure didn’t want to
return to teaching.
“Let’s work on the system,” Simons told Berlekamp
in one more urgent phone call. “Next year, I know, we
can be up 80 percent.”
Eighty percent in a year? Now he’s really gone too
far, Berlekamp thought.
Such enormous returns weren’t likely, he told
Simons. And you really don’t need to call so much, Jim.
Simons couldn’t stop, though. Eventually, it all became
too much—Berlekamp quit, a fresh blow for Simons.
“The hell with it, I’m just going to run it myself,”
Simons told a friend.

=
Around the same time, in a different part of New York
State fifty miles away, a tall, handsome, middle-aged
scientist stared at a whiteboard, grappling with his own
challenges. Robert Mercer was working in a sprawling
IBM research center in a Westchester suburb searching
for ways to get computers to do a better job transcribing
speech into text and even translate languages, among
other tasks. Rather than follow conventional methods,
Mercer was tackling his problems with an early form of
large-scale machine learning. He and his colleagues were

feeding their computers with enough data to enable them
to perform tasks on their own. Mercer was nearing his
second decade at the computer giant, however, and it
still wasn’t clear how much he and the team could
accomplish.
Colleagues couldn’t figure Mercer out, not even those
who had spent years working closely with him. Mercer
was unusually gifted. He was also odd and socially
awkward. Every day for lunch, Mercer ate either a tuna
or peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwich packed in a used
brown paper bag. Around the office, Mercer constantly
hummed or whistled, usually classical tunes, wearing a
look of detached amusement.
Much of what came out of Mercer’s mouth was
brilliant, even profound, though it could also be utterly
jarring. Once, Mercer told colleagues he believed he
would live forever. The staffers thought he was serious,
though historic precedent didn’t seem on his side. Later,
colleagues would learn of Mercer’s deep-seated hostility
toward government and of radical political views that
would come to dominate his life and affect the lives of
many others.
At IBM, Mercer spent long hours huddled with a
younger colleague named Peter Brown, a charming,
creative, and outgoing mathematician whose dark
glasses, thick mane of unruly brown hair, and kinetic
energy brought to mind a mad professor. The two men
didn’t spend much time discussing money or markets.
Personal turmoil would lead Mercer and Brown to join
forces with Simons, however. His unlikely quest to crack
the market’s code and lead an investing revolution would
become theirs.

=
Simons wasn’t aware of the imposing obstacles in his
way. Nor did he know that tragedy stalked him, or that

political upheaval would upend his firm.
Looking out from his office onto the East River that
day in the fall of 1990, Simons just knew he had a
difficult problem to solve.
“There are patterns in the market,” Simons told a
colleague. “I know we can find them.”

PA R T O N E

Money Isn’t Everything

CHAPTER ONE

J

immy Simons grabbed a broom and headed upstairs.

It was the winter of 1952 and the fourteen-yearold was trying to earn some spending money at Breck’s
garden supply near his home in Newton, Massachusetts,
the leafy Boston suburb. It wasn’t going well. Working in
a stockroom downstairs, the young man found himself so
lost in thought that he had misplaced the sheep manure,
planting seeds, and most everything else.
Frustrated, the owners asked Jimmy to walk the
store’s narrow aisles and sweep its hardwood floors, a
mindless and repetitive task. To Jimmy, the demotion
felt like a stroke of luck. Finally, he was left alone to
ponder what mattered most in his life. Math. Girls. The
future.
They’re paying me to think!
Weeks later, his Christmas-time job complete, the
couple who owned the store asked Jimmy about his longterm plans.
“I want to study mathematics at MIT.”
They burst out laughing. A young man so
absentminded that he couldn’t keep track of basic
gardening supplies hoped to be a math major—at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, no less?
“They thought it was the funniest thing they had ever
heard,” Simons recalls.
The skepticism didn’t bother Jimmy, not even the
giggles. The teenager was filled with preternatural
confidence and an unusual determination to accomplish

something special, the result of supportive parents who
had experienced both high hopes and deep regrets in
their own lives.
Marcia and Matthew Simons welcomed James
Harris to the family in the spring of 1938. She and Matty
poured time and energy into their son, who remained
their only child after Marcia suffered a series of
subsequent miscarriages. A sharp intellect with an
outgoing personality and subtle wit, Marcia volunteered
in Jimmy’s school but never had the opportunity to work
outside the home. She funneled her dreams and passions
into Jimmy, pushing him academically and assuring him
that success was ahead.
“She was ambitious for me,” Simons recalls. “She saw
me as her project.”
Matty Simons had a different perspective on both life
and parenting. From the age of six, Matty, one of ten
children, hustled to make money for the family, selling
newspapers in the streets and hauling bags for travelers
at a nearby train station. When he reached high school
age, Matty began working full time. He tried going to
night school but quit, too tired to concentrate.
As a father, Matty was kind, soft-spoken, and
easygoing. He enjoyed coming home and spinning tall
tales for Marcia, telling her about Cuba’s imminent plans
to build a bridge to Florida, for example, as Jimmy did
his best to mask a grin. Marcia might have been the
family’s intellect, but she also was remarkably gullible.
Matty would concoct increasingly outrageous stories
until Marcia finally picked up on the fibs, a family game
guaranteed to crack Jimmy up.
“She didn’t usually get it,” Simons says, “but I did.”
Matty worked as a sales manager for 20th Century
Fox, driving to theaters around New England to pitch the
studio’s latest films. Shirley Temple, the era’s biggest
star, was under contract to Fox, so Matty cobbled her

films with four or five others and convinced theaters to
pay for the package. Matty enjoyed his job and was
promoted to sales manager, sparking hopes that he
might rise in the corporate ranks. Matty’s plans changed
when his father-in-law, Peter Kantor, asked him to work
at his shoe factory. Peter promised an ownership stake,
and Matty felt obligated to join the family business.
Peter’s factory, which produced upscale women’s
shoes, was a success, but money flew out almost as fast
as it came in. A heavyset, flamboyant man who favored
expensive clothing, drove a succession of late-model
Cadillacs, and wore elevator shoes to compensate for his
five-foot-four stature, Peter blew much of his wealth on
horse races and a series of paramours. On paydays, Peter
let Jimmy and his cousin Richard Lourie hold piles of
cash “as high as our heads,” Richard recalls. “We both
loved it.”1
Peter projected a certain insouciance and a love of
life, attitudes Jimmy later would adopt. A native of
Russia, Peter shared naughty stories about the old
country—most of which featured wolves, women, caviar,
and a lot of vodka—and he taught his grandsons a few
key Russian phrases—“Give me a cigarette” and “Kiss my
ass”—sending the boys into fits of laughter. Peter placed
the bulk of his cash in a safe-deposit box, likely to shield
it from taxes, but he made sure to have $1,500 in his
breast pocket at all times. He was found with that exact
amount the day he died, surrounded by Christmas cards
from dozens of appreciative female friends.
Matty Simons spent years as the general manager of
the shoe factory, but he never received the ownership
share Peter had promised. Later in life, Matty told his
son he wished he hadn’t forgone a promising and
exciting career to do what was expected of him.
“The lesson was: Do what you like in life, not what
you feel you ‘should’ do,” Simons says. “It’s something I
never forgot.”

What Jimmy liked to do more than anything else was
think, often about mathematics. He was preoccupied
with numbers, shapes, and slopes. At the age of three,
Jimmy doubled numbers and divided them in half,
figuring out all the powers of 2 up to 1,024 before
becoming bored. One day, while taking the family to the
beach, Matty stopped for gasoline, perplexing the young
boy. The way Jimmy reasoned, the family’s automobile
could never have run out of gas. After it used half its
tank, there would be another half remaining, then they
could use half of that, and so on, without ever reaching
empty.
The four-year-old had stumbled onto a classic
mathematical problem involving a high degree of logic. If
one must always travel half the remaining distance
before reaching one’s destination, and any distance, no
matter how small, can be halved, how can one ever reach
one’s destination? The Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea
was the first to address the dilemma, the most famous of
a group of paradoxes that challenged mathematicians for
centuries.
Like many children without siblings, Jimmy sat with
his thoughts for long stretches of time and even talked to
himself. In nursery school, he would climb a nearby tree,
sit on a branch, and ponder. Sometimes Marcia had to
come and force him to climb down and play with the
other children.
Unlike his parents, Jimmy was determined to focus
on his own passions. When he was eight, Dr. Kaplan, the
Simons family’s doctor, suggested a career in medicine,
saying it was the ideal profession “for a bright Jewish
boy.”
Jimmy bristled.
“I want to be a mathematician or a scientist,” he
replied.

The doctor tried to reason with the boy. “Listen, you
can’t make any money in mathematics.”
Jimmy said he wanted to try. He didn’t quite
understand what mathematicians did, but it likely
involved numbers, which seemed good enough. Anyway,
he knew perfectly well he didn’t want to be a doctor.
In school, Jimmy was smart and mischievous,
displaying his mother’s self-assurance and his father’s
impish humor. He loved books, frequently visiting a local
library to take out four a week, many well above his
grade level. Mathematical concepts captivated him most,
however. At the Lawrence School in Brookline, which
counts television newscasters Mike Wallace and Barbara
Walters as alumni, Jimmy was elected class president
and finished close to the top of his grade, losing out in
the latter case to a young woman who didn’t find herself
lost in thought nearly as often as he did.
During that time, Jimmy had a friend who was quite
wealthy, and he was struck by the comfortable lifestyle
his family enjoyed.
“It’s nice to be very rich. I observed that,” Simons
later said. “I had no interest in business, which is not to
say I had no interest in money.”2
Adventures occupied much of Jimmy’s time.
Sometimes he and a friend, Jim Harpel, rode trolleys to
Bailey’s Ice Cream in Boston to enjoy a pint. When they
were older, the pair sneaked into burlesque shows at the
Old Howard Theatre. One Saturday morning, as the boys
headed out the door, Harpel’s father noticed binoculars
around their necks.
“You boys going to the Old Howard?” he asked.
Busted.
“How’d you know, Mr. Harpel?” Jimmy asked.

“Not much bird watching around here,” Mr. Harpel
replied.
After ninth grade, the Simons family moved from
Brookline to Newton, where Jimmy attended Newton
High School, an elite public school well equipped to
nurture his emerging passions. As a sophomore, Jimmy
enjoyed debating theoretical concepts, including the
notion that two-dimensional surfaces could extend
forever.
After graduating high school in three years, Simons,
thin and solidly built, set off on a cross-country drive
with Harpel. Everywhere they went, the seventeen-yearolds—middle-class and, until then, largely sheltered from
hardship—conversed with locals. Crossing into
Mississippi, they saw African Americans working as
sharecroppers and living in chicken coops.
“Reconstruction had left them as tenant farmers, but
it was the same as slavery,” Harpel recalls. “It was a bit of
a shock to us.”
Camping in a state park, the boys visited a swimming
pool but saw no African Americans, which surprised
them. Simons asked a heavyset, middle-aged park
employee why no one of color was around.
“We don’t allow no n——s,” he said.
Visiting other cities, Simons and Harpel saw families
living in abject poverty, experiences that left a mark on
the boys, making them more sensitive to the plight of
society’s disadvantaged.
Simons enrolled at MIT, as he had hoped, and even
skipped the first year of mathematics thanks to
advanced-placement courses he took in high school.
College brought immediate challenges, however. Early
on, Simons dealt with stress and intense stomach pain,
losing twenty pounds and spending two weeks in the

hospital. Doctors eventually diagnosed colitis and
prescribed steroids to stabilize his health.
Overconfident during the second semester of his
freshman year, Simons registered for a graduate course
in abstract algebra. It was an outright disaster. Simons
was unable to keep up with his classmates and couldn’t
understand the point of the assignments and course
topics.
Simons bought a book on the subject and took it
home for the summer, reading and thinking for hours at
a time. Finally, it clicked. Simons aced subsequent
algebra classes. Though he received a D in an upper-level
calculus course in his sophomore year, the professor
allowed him to enroll in the next level’s class, which
discussed Stokes’ theorem, a generalization of Isaac
Newton’s fundamental theorem of calculus that relates
line integrals to surface integrals in three dimensions.
The young man was fascinated—a theorem involving
calculus, algebra, and geometry seemed to produce
simple, unexpected harmony. Simons did so well in the
class that students came to him seeking help.
“I just blossomed,” Simons says. “It was a glorious
feeling.”
The way that powerful theorems and formulas could
unlock truths and unify distinct areas in math and
geometry captured Simons.
“It was the elegance of it all, the concepts were
beautiful,” he says.
When Simons studied with students like Barry
Mazur—who graduated in two years and later would win
top mathematics awards and teach at Harvard University
—Simons concluded he wasn’t quite at their level. He
was close, though. And Simons realized he had a unique
approach, mulling problems until he arrived at original
solutions. Friends sometimes noticed him lying down,
eyes closed, for hours at a time. He was a ponderer with

imagination and “good taste,” or the instinct to attack the
kinds of problems that might lead to true breakthroughs.
“I realized I might not be spectacular or the best, but
I could do something good. I just had that confidence,”
he says.
One day, Simons saw two of his professors,
renowned mathematicians Warren Ambrose and Isadore
Singer, in deep discussion after midnight at a local café.
Simons decided he wanted that kind of life—cigarettes,
coffee, and math at all hours.
“It was like an epiphany . . . a flash of light,” he says.
Away from mathematics, Simons did everything he
could to avoid courses demanding too much of him. MIT
students were required to enroll in a physical-fitness
course, but Simons didn’t want to waste time showering
and changing, so he signed up for archery. He and
another student, Jimmy Mayer, who had come to MIT
from Colombia, decided to make the class a bit more
interesting, betting a nickel on every shot. They became
fast friends, wooing girls and playing poker with
classmates into the night.
“If you lost five dollars, you practically shot yourself,”
Mayer recalls.
Simons was funny, friendly, spoke his mind, and
often got into trouble. As a freshman, he enjoyed filling
water pistols with lighter fluid and then using a cigarette
lighter to create a homemade flame thrower. Once, after
Simons created a bathroom bonfire in Baker House, a
dormitory on Charles River, he flushed a pint of lighter
fluid down a toilet and closed the door behind him.
Glancing back, Simons saw an orange glow around the
door frame—the inside of the bathroom was aflame.
“Don’t go in there!” he screamed to approaching
classmates.

Inside the toilet, the fluid had heated up and ignited
into a fireball. Luckily, the dorm was built with dark red
rustic bricks and the fire failed to spread. Simons
confessed to his crime and paid the school fifty dollars
total in ten-week installments for the necessary repairs.
By 1958, after three years at MIT, Simons had
enough credits to graduate at the age of twenty, earning a
bachelor of science in mathematics. Before entering
graduate school, though, he yearned for a new
adventure. Simons told a friend, Joe Rosenshein, that he
wanted to do something that would “go down in the
records” and would be “historic.”
Simons thought a long-distance roller-skating trip
might attract attention but it seemed too tiring. Inviting
a news crew to follow him and his friends on a waterskiing trip to South America was another possibility, but
the logistics proved daunting. Hanging out in Harvard
Square with Rosenshein one afternoon, Simons saw a
Vespa motor scooter race by.
“I wonder if we could use one of those?” Simons
asked.
He developed a plan to undertake a “newsworthy”
trip, convincing two local dealerships to give him and his
friends discounts on Lambretta scooters, the top brand
at the time, in exchange for the right to film their trip.
Simons, Rosenshein, and Mayer set out for South
America, a trip they nicknamed “Buenos Aires or Bust.”
The young men drove west through Illinois before
heading south to Mexico. They traveled on country roads
and slept on porches, in abandoned police stations, and
in forests, where they set up jungle hammocks with
mosquito netting. A family in Mexico City warned the
boys about bandits and insisted they buy a gun for
protection, teaching the young men to say a crucial
phrase in Spanish: “If you move, we’ll kill you.”

Driving with a noisy, broken muffler through a small
southern Mexican town around dinnertime, wearing
leather jackets and looking like the motorcycle gang in
Marlon Brando’s classic film The Wild One, the boys
stopped to find a place to eat. When the locals saw
visitors disturbing their traditional evening stroll, they
turned furious.
“Gringo, what are you doing here?” someone called
out.
Within minutes, fifty hostile young men, some
holding machetes, surrounded Simons and his friends,
pushing their backs up against a wall. Rosenshein
reached for the gun but remembered it only had six
bullets, not nearly enough to handle the swelling crowd.
Suddenly, police officers emerged, pushing through the
throng to arrest the MIT students for disturbing the
peace.
The boys were thrown in jail. Soon, it was
surrounded by a mob, which screamed and whistled at
them, causing such commotion that the mayor sent
someone to investigate. When the mayor heard that
three college kids from Boston were causing trouble, he
had them brought directly to his office. It turned out that
the mayor had graduated from Harvard University and
was eager to hear the latest news from Cambridge.
Moments after fending off an angry mob, the boys sat
down with local officials for a sumptuous, late-night
dinner. Simons and his friends made sure to get out of
town before dawn, though, to avoid additional trouble.
Rosenshein had enough of the drama and headed
home, but Simons and Mayer pushed on, making it to
Bogotá in seven weeks, through Mexico, Guatemala, and
Costa Rica, overcoming mudslides and raging rivers
along the way. They arrived with almost no food or
money, thrilled to stay in the luxurious home of another
classmate, Edmundo Esquenazi, a native of the city.
Friends and family lined up to meet the visitors, and they

spent the rest of the summer playing croquet and
relaxing with their hosts.
When Simons returned to MIT to begin his graduate
studies, his advisor suggested he finish his PhD at the
University of California, Berkeley, so he could work with
a professor named Shiing-Shen Chern, a former math
prodigy from China and a leading differential geometer
and topologist. Simons had some unfinished business to
take care of, though. He had begun dating a pretty,
petite, dark-haired eighteen-year-old named Barbara
Bluestein, who was in her first year at nearby Wellesley
College. After four consecutive nights of intense
conversation, they were enamored and engaged.
“We talked and talked and talked,” Barbara recalls.
“He was going to Berkeley, and I wanted to join him.”
Barbara’s parents were furious about the quicksilver
relationship. Barbara was too young to wed, her mother
insisted. She also worried about a potential power
imbalance between Barbara and her self-assured fiancé.
“Years later, he’s going to wipe the floor with you,”
she warned Barbara.
Determined to marry Simons despite her parents’
objections, Barbara negotiated a compromise—she’d go
with him to Berkeley, but they’d wait until her
sophomore year to wed.
Simons received a fellowship to study in Berkeley.
Arriving on campus in the late summer of 1959, he got an
early and unhappy surprise—Chern was nowhere to be
found. The professor had just left for a year-long
sabbatical. Simons began working with other
mathematicians, including Bertram Kostant, but he met
frustrations. One night, in early October, Simons visited
Barbara’s boardinghouse and told her his research
wasn’t going well. She thought he looked depressed.
“Let’s get married,” she recalls telling him.

Simons was on board. They decided to go to Reno,
Nevada, where they wouldn’t have to wait days for a
blood test, as was required in California. The young
couple had almost no money, so Simons’s roommate lent
him enough to purchase two bus tickets for the twohundred-mile trip. In Reno, Barbara persuaded the
manager of a local bank to let her cash an out-of-state
check so they could buy a marriage license. After a brief
ceremony, Simons used the remaining money to play
poker, winning enough to buy his new bride a black
bathing suit.
Back in Berkeley, the couple hoped to keep their
wedding a secret, at least until they figured out how to
break the news to their families. When Barbara’s father
wrote a letter saying he was planning a visit, they
realized they’d have to own up. Simons and his new bride
wrote to their respective parents, filling several pages
with mundane news about school and classes, before
adding identical postscripts:
“By the way, we got married.”
After Barbara’s parents cooled down, her father
arranged for a local rabbi to marry the couple in a more
traditional ceremony. The newlyweds rented an
apartment on Parker Street, near a campus buzzing with
political activity, and Simons made progress on a PhD
dissertation focused on differential geometry—the study
of curved, multidimensional spaces using methods from
calculus, topology, and linear algebra. Simons also spent
time on a new passion: trading. The couple had received
$5,000 as a wedding gift, and Simons was eager to
multiply the cash. He did a bit of research and drove to a
Merrill Lynch brokerage office in nearby San Francisco,
where he bought shares of United Fruit Company, which
sold tropical fruit, and Celanese Corporation, a chemical
company.
The shares barely budged in price, frustrating
Simons.

“This is kind of boring,” he told the broker. “Do you
have anything more exciting?”
“You should look at soybeans,” he said.
Simons knew nothing about commodities or how to
trade futures (financial contracts promising the delivery
of commodities or other investments at a fixed price at a
future date), but he became an eager student. At the
time, soybeans sold for $2.50 per bushel. When the
broker said Merrill Lynch’s analysts expected prices to go
to three dollars or even higher, Simons’s eyes widened.
He bought two futures contracts, watched soybeans soar,
and scored several thousand dollars of profits in a matter
of days.
Simons was hooked.
“I was fascinated by the action and the possibility I
could make money short-term,” he says.
An older friend urged Simons to sell his holdings and
pocket his profits, warning that commodity prices are
volatile. Simons disregarded the advice. Sure enough,
soybean prices tumbled, and Simons barely broke even.
The roller-coaster ride might have discouraged some
novice investors, but it only whet Simons’s appetite. He
began getting up early to drive to San Francisco so he
could be at Merrill Lynch’s offices by 7:30 a.m., in time
for the opening of trading in Chicago. For hours, he
would stand and watch prices flash by on a big board,
making trades while trying to keep up with the action.
Even after heading home to resume his studies, Simons
kept an eye on the markets.
“It was kind of a rush,” Simons recalls.
It became too much, though. Schlepping into San
Francisco at the crack of dawn while trying to complete a
challenging thesis proved taxing. When Barbara became
pregnant, there were too many balls for Simons to juggle.

Reluctantly, he put a stop to his trading, but a seed had
been planted.
For his doctoral thesis, Simons wanted to develop a
proof for a difficult, outstanding problem in the field, but
Kostant doubted he could pull it off. World-class
mathematicians had tried and failed, Kostant told him.
Don’t waste your time. The skepticism seemed only to
spur Simons. His resulting thesis, “On the Transitivity of
Holonomy Systems,” completed in 1962 after just two
years of work, dealt with the geometry of
multidimensional curved spaces. (When Simons speaks
to novices, he likes to define holonomy as “parallel
transport of tangent vectors around closed curves in
multiple-dimensional curved spaces.” Really.) A
respected journal accepted the thesis for publication,
helping Simons win a prestigious three-year teaching
position at MIT.
Even as he made plans with Barbara to return to
Cambridge with their baby, Elizabeth, Simons began to
question his future. The next few decades seemed laid
out for him all too neatly: research, teaching, more
research, and still more teaching. Simons loved
mathematics, but he also needed new adventure. He
seemed to thrive on overcoming odds and defying
skepticism, and he didn’t see obstacles on the horizon. At
just twenty-three, Simons was experiencing an
existential crisis.
“Is this it? Am I going to do this my whole life?” he
asked Barbara one day at home. “There has to be more.”
After a year at MIT, Simons’s restlessness got the
better of him. He returned to Bogotá to see if he could
start a business with his Colombian schoolmates,
Esquenazi and Mayer. Recalling the pristine asphalt tile
in his MIT dormitory, Esquenazi complained about the
poor quality of floor material in Bogotá. Simons said he
knew someone who made flooring, so they decided to
start a local factory to produce vinyl floor tile and PVC

piping. The financing mostly came from Esquenazi’s
father-in-law, Victor Shaio, but Simons and his father
also took small stakes.
The business seemed in good hands, and Simons
didn’t feel he had much to contribute, so he returned to
academia, accepting a research position at Harvard
University in 1963. There, he taught two classes,
including an advanced graduate course on partial
differential equations, an area within geometry he
anticipated would become important. Simons didn’t
know much about partial differential equations (PDEs),
but he figured teaching the course was a good way to
learn. Simons told his students he was learning the topic
just a week or so before they were, a confession they
found amusing.
Simons was a popular professor with an informal,
enthusiastic style. He cracked jokes and rarely wore a
jacket or tie, the outfit of choice among many faculty
members. His jovial exterior masked mounting
pressures, however. Simons’s research was going slowly,
and he didn’t enjoy the Harvard community. He had
borrowed money to invest in the floor-tile factory
Esquenazi and the others were building, and he had
persuaded his parents to mortgage their home for their
own share of the deal. To pad his income, Simons began
teaching two additional courses at nearby Cambridge
Junior College, work that added to his stress, though he
kept it secret from his friends and family.
Simons was hustling for money, but it wasn’t simply
to pay off his debts. He hungered for true wealth. Simons
liked to buy nice things, but he wasn’t extravagant. Nor
did he feel pressure from Barbara, who still sometimes
wore items of clothing from her high school days. Other
motivations seemed to be driving Simons. Friends and
others suspected he wanted to have some kind of impact
on the world. Simons saw how wealth can grant
independence and influence.

“Jim understood at an early age that money is
power,” Barbara says. “He didn’t want people to have
power over him.”
As he sat in a Harvard library, his earlier career
doubts resurfaced. Simons wondered if another kind of
job might bring more fulfillment and excitement—and
perhaps some wealth, at least enough to pay off his
debts.
The mounting pressures finally got to Simons. He
decided to make a break.

CHAPTER TWO
Q: What’s the difference between a PhD in
mathematics and a large pizza?
A: A large pizza can feed a family of four.

I intelligence group helping to fight the ongoing Cold
n 1964, Simons quit Harvard University to join an

War with the Soviet Union. The group told Simons he
could continue his mathematics research as he worked
on government assignments. Just as important, he
doubled his previous salary and began paying off his
debts.
Simons’s offer came from the Princeton, New Jersey,
division of the Institute for Defense Analyses, an elite
research organization that hired mathematicians from
top universities to assist the National Security Agency—
the United States’ largest and most secretive intelligence
agency—in detecting and attacking Russian codes and
ciphers.
Simons joined during a tumultuous period for the
IDA. High-level Soviet codes hadn’t been cracked on a
regular basis in more than a decade. Simons and his
colleagues at the IDA’s Communications Research
Division were tasked with securing US communications
and making sense of stubbornly impenetrable Soviet
code. The IDA taught Simons how to develop
mathematical models to discern and interpret patterns in
seemingly meaningless data. He began using statistical
analysis and probability theory, mathematical tools that
would influence his work.
To break codes, Simons would first determine a plan
of attack. Then, he’d create an algorithm—a series of

steps for his computer to follow—to test and implement
his strategy. Simons was awful at designing computer
programs, forcing him to rely on the division’s in-house
programmers for the actual coding, but he honed other
skills that would prove valuable later in his career.
“I learned I liked to make algorithms and testing
things out on a computer,” Simons later said.1
Early on, Simons helped develop an ultrafast codebreaking algorithm, solving a long-standing problem in
the group. Soon thereafter, intelligence experts in
Washington discovered an isolated instance in which the
Soviets sent a coded message with an incorrect setting.
Simons and two colleagues seized on the glitch, which
provided rare insight into the internal construction of the
enemy’s system, and helped devise ways to exploit it. The
advances made Simons a sleuthing star and earned the
team a trip to Washington, DC, to accept personal thanks
from Defense Department officials.
The only problem with his new job: Simons couldn’t
share his accomplishments with anyone outside the
organization. Members of the group were sworn to
secrecy. The word the government used to describe how
it classified the IDA’s work was, itself, classified.
“What did you do today?” Barbara would ask when
Simons came home from work.
“Oh, the usual,” he’d reply.
Before long, Barbara gave up asking.
Simons was struck by the unique way talented
researchers were recruited and managed in his unit. Staff
members, most of whom had doctorates, were hired for
their brainpower, creativity, and ambition, rather than
for any specific expertise or background. The assumption
was that researchers would find problems to work on
and be clever enough to solve them. Lenny Baum, among
the most accomplished code-breakers, developed a

saying that became the group’s credo: “Bad ideas is good,
good ideas is terrific, no ideas is terrible.”
“It was an idea factory,” says Lee Neuwirth, the
division’s deputy director, whose daughter, Bebe, later
became a Broadway and television star.
Researchers couldn’t discuss their work with those
outside the organization. Internally, however, the
division was structured to breed an unusual degree of
openness and collegiality. Most of the twenty-five or so
employees—all mathematicians and engineers—were
given the same title: technical staff member. The team
routinely shared credit and met for champagne toasts
after discovering solutions to particularly thorny
problems. Most days, researchers wandered into one
another’s offices to offer assistance or lend an ear. When
staffers met each day for afternoon tea, they discussed
the news, played chess, worked on puzzles, or competed
at Go, the complicated Chinese board game.
Simons and his wife threw regular dinner parties at
which IDA staffers became inebriated on Barbara’s rumheavy Fish House Punch. The group played high-stakes
poker matches that lasted until the next morning, with
Simons often walking away with fistfuls of his colleagues’
cash.
One evening, the gang came over but Simons was
nowhere to be found.
“Jim was arrested,” Barbara told the crew.
Simons had racked up so many parking tickets in his
beat-up Cadillac, and had ignored so many of the
resulting summonses, that the police threw him in jail.
The mathematicians piled into a few cars, drove to the
police station, and chipped in to bail Simons out.
The IDA was filled with unconventional thinkers and
outsize personalities. One large room hosted a dozen or
so personal computers for the staff. One morning, a

guard discovered a cryptologist in the room wearing a
bathrobe and nothing more; he had been thrown out of
his home and had been living in the computer room.
Another time, late at night, someone noticed a staffer
typing away on a keyboard. What was shocking was that
the employee was typing with his bare, smelly toes,
rather than his fingers.
“His fingers were bad enough,” Neuwirth says. “It
was really disgusting. People were furious.”
Even as Simons and his colleagues were uncovering
Soviet secrets, Simons was nurturing one of his own.
Computing power was becoming more advanced but
securities firms were slow to embrace the new
technology, continuing to rely on card-sorting methods
for accounting and other areas. Simons decided to start a
company to electronically trade and research stocks, a
concept with the potential to revolutionize the industry.
The twenty-eight-year-old Simons shared the idea with
his boss, Dick Leibler, as well as the IDA’s best
programmer. They both agreed to join his company, to
be named iStar.
Accustomed to top-secret schemes, the group worked
surreptitiously on the company. One day, though,
Neuwirth got wind of the plot. Upset that the pending
departures would gut the group, Neuwirth stormed into
Leibler’s office.
“Why are you guys leaving?”
“How did you find out?” Leibler responded. “Who
else knows?”
“Everyone—you guys left the last sheet of your
business plan on the Xerox machine.”
Their strategy was more Maxwell Smart than James
Bond, it turned out.
In the end, Simons failed to raise enough money to
get the business off the ground, eventually dropping the

idea. It didn’t feel like much of a setback, because
Simons was finally making progress in his research on
minimal varieties, the subfield of differential geometry
that had long captivated him.
Differential equations—which are used in physics,
biology, finance, sociology, and many other fields—
describe the derivatives of mathematical quantities, or
their relative rates of change. Isaac Newton’s famous
physics equation—the net force on an object is equal to
its mass times its acceleration—is a differential equation
because acceleration is a second derivative with respect
to time. Equations involving derivatives with respect to
time and space are examples of partial differential
equations and can be used to describe elasticity, heat,
and sound, among other things.
An important application of PDEs to geometry is in
the theory of minimal varieties, which had been the focus
of Simons’s research since his first semester as an MIT
instructor. A classic illustration in the field concerns the
surface formed by a soap film stretching across a wire
frame that has been dipped in soap solution and lifted
out. Such a surface has minimal area compared with any
other surface with the same wire frame as its boundary.
Experimenting with soap films in the nineteenth century,
Belgian physicist Joseph Plateau asked whether such
surfaces with “minimal” areas always exist, and whether
they are so smooth that every point looks alike, no
matter how complicated or twisted the wire frame. The
answer to what became known as Plateau’s problem was
yes, at least for ordinary, two-dimensional surfaces, as
proved by a New York mathematician in 1930. Simons
wanted to know if the same would be true for minimal
surfaces in higher dimensions, something geometers call
minimal varieties.
Mathematicians who focus on theoretical questions
often immerse themselves in their work—walking,
sleeping, even dreaming about problems for years on

end. Those with no exposure to this kind of mathematics,
which can be described as abstract or pure, are liable to
dismiss it as pointless. Simons wasn’t merely solving
equations like a high school student, however. He was
hoping to discover and codify universal principles, rules,
and truths, with the goal of furthering the understanding
of these mathematical objects. Albert Einstein argued
that there is a natural order in the world;
mathematicians like Simons can be seen as searching for
evidence of that structure. There is true beauty to their
work, especially when it succeeds in revealing something
about the universe’s natural order. Often, such theories
find practical applications, even many years later, while
advancing our knowledge of the universe.
Eventually, a series of conversations with Frederick
Almgren Jr., a professor at nearby Princeton University
who had solved the problem in three dimensions, helped
Simons achieve a breakthrough. Simons created a partial
differential equation of his own, which became known as
the Simons equation, and used it to develop a uniform
solution through six dimensions. He also proposed a
counterexample in dimension seven. Later, three
Italians, including Fields Medal winner Enrico Bombieri,
showed the counterexample to be correct.
In 1968, Simons published “Minimal Varieties in
Riemannian Manifolds,” which became a foundational
paper for geometers, proved crucial in related fields, and
continues to garner citations, underscoring its enduring
significance. These achievements helped establish
Simons as one of the world’s preeminent geometers.

=
Even as Simons realized success in code-breaking and
mathematics, he kept searching for new ways to make
money. The IDA granted its researchers a remarkable
amount of flexibility in their work, so Simons spent time

examining the stock market. Working with Baum and
two other colleagues, Simons developed a newfangled
stock-trading system. The quartet published an internal,
classified paper for the IDA called “Probabilistic Models
for and Prediction of Stock Market Behavior” that
proposed a method of trading that the researchers
claimed could generate annual gains of at least 50
percent.
Simons and his colleagues ignored the basic
information most investors focus on, such as earnings,
dividends, and corporate news, what the code breakers
termed the “fundamental economic statistics of the
market.” Instead, they proposed searching for a small
number of “macroscopic variables” capable of predicting
the market’s short-term behavior. They posited that the
market had as many as eight underlying “states”—such
as “high variance,” when stocks experienced larger-thanaverage moves, and “good,” when shares generally rose.
Here’s what was really unique: The paper didn’t try
to identify or predict these states using economic theory
or other conventional methods, nor did the researchers
seek to address why the market entered certain states.
Simons and his colleagues used mathematics to
determine the set of states best fitting the observed
pricing data; their model then made its bets accordingly.
The whys didn’t matter, Simons and his colleagues
seemed to suggest, just the strategies to take advantage
of the inferred states.
For the majority of investors, this was an unheard-of
approach, but gamblers would have understood it well.
Poker players surmise the mood of their opponents by
judging their behavior and adjusting their strategies
accordingly. Facing off against someone in a miserable
mood calls for certain tactics; others are optimal if a
competitor seems overjoyed and overconfident. Players
don’t need to know why their opponent is glum or
exuberant to profit from those moods; they just have to

identify the moods themselves. Simons and the codebreakers proposed a similar approach to predicting stock
prices, relying on a sophisticated mathematical tool
called a hidden Markov model. Just as a gambler might
guess an opponent’s mood based on his or her decisions,
an investor might deduce a market’s state from its price
movements.
Simons’s paper was crude, even for the late 1960s.
He and his colleagues made some naive assumptions,
such as that trades could be made “under ideal
conditions,” which included no trading costs, even
though the model required heavy, daily trading. Still, the
paper can be seen as something of a trailblazer. Until
then, investors generally sought an underlying economic
rationale to explain and predict stock moves, or they
used simple technical analysis, which involved
employing graphs or other representations of past price
movements to discover repeatable patterns. Simons and
his colleagues were proposing a third approach, one that
had similarities with technical trading but was much
more sophisticated and reliant on tools of math and
science. They were suggesting that one could deduce a
range of “signals” capable of conveying useful
information about expected market moves.
Simons and his colleagues weren’t alone in
suggesting that stock prices are set by a complex process
with many inputs, including some that are hard or even
impossible to pin down and not necessarily related to
traditional, fundamental factors. Around that time,
Harry Markowitz, the University of Chicago Nobel
laureate and father of modern portfolio theory, was
searching for anomalies in securities prices, as was
mathematician Edward Thorp. Thorp would attempt an
early form of computerized trading, gaining a head start
on Simons. (Stay tuned for more, dear reader.)
Simons was part of this vanguard. He and his
colleagues were arguing that it wasn’t important to

understand all the underlying levers of the market’s
machine, but to find a mathematical system that
matched them well enough to generate consistent
profits, a view that would inform Simons’s approach to
trading years later. Their model foreshadowed
revolutions in finance—including factor investing, the
use of models based on unobservable states, and other
forms of quantitative investing—that would sweep the
investing world decades later.

=
By 1967, Simons was thriving at the IDA. He was
matching wits with Russians, making progress in his
math research, learning how to manage big brains, and
gaining a better understanding of the power of
computation. His ability to identify the most promising
ideas of his colleagues was especially distinctive.
“He was a terrific listener,” Neuwirth says. “It’s one
thing to have good ideas, it’s another to recognize when
others do. . . . If there was a pony in your pile of horse
manure, he would find it.”
By then, Leibler had begun discussing retirement,
and Simons was in line to become the division’s deputy
director. A bump in salary and increased prestige seemed
within reach.
The Vietnam War changed everything. That fall,
protests cropped up around the country, including on the
campus of Princeton University. Few Princeton students
realized a division supporting the NSA was in their
neighborhood until an article appeared in the school
newspaper, the Daily Princetonian, alerting the
community to the fact. Simons and his colleagues
weren’t doing work related to the war, and many of them
were vehemently against the effort. That summer, when
Jim and Barbara’s daughter Liz went to sleepaway camp,

her friends received packages of candy from their
parents; Liz got peace necklaces.
The code breakers’ unhappiness with the war didn’t
stop Princeton students from launching a series of
protests, including a sit-in blocking the IDA’s entrance.
At one point, the building was trashed, Neuwirth’s car
was pelted with eggs, and he was called a “baby killer.”2
As debate about the war heated up across the
country, the New York Times published an opinion piece
by General Maxwell D. Taylor as the cover story of its
Sunday magazine. In the piece, General Taylor—the
decorated war veteran who had served as chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and had convinced President
John F. Kennedy to send combat troops to the region—
made a forceful argument that the United States was
winning the war and that the nation should rally around
the effort.
It was too much for Simons, who didn’t want readers
to be left with an impression that all IDA employees
backed the war. He wrote a six-paragraph letter to the
paper arguing that there were better uses of the nation’s
resources than conducting war in Vietnam.
“It would make us a stronger country to rebuild
Watts than it would to bomb Hanoi,” Simons wrote. “It
would make us stronger to construct decent
transportation on our East Coast than it would to destroy
all the bridges in Vietnam.”
After the newspaper published the letter, Simons was
rather pleased with himself. He didn’t get much reaction
from colleagues and figured Taylor was fine with a little
difference of opinion. A bit later, a stringer for
Newsweek working on an article about Defense
Department employees opposed to the war contacted
Simons, asking how they handled their qualms. Simons
said he and his colleagues generally worked on personal
projects half the time, while spending the rest of their

time on government projects. Since he opposed the war,
Simons said, he had decided to devote all his time to his
own mathematics research until the fighting ended, and
then he’d only do Defense Department work, to even
things out.
In truth, Simons hadn’t formally established any
kind of clean break from defense work. It was a personal
goal, one he probably shouldn’t have shared with the
public.
“I was twenty-nine,” Simons explains. “No one had
ever asked to interview me. . . . And I was a wise guy.”
Simons told Leibler about the interview, and Leibler
gave Taylor a heads-up about the forthcoming
Newsweek article. A short while later, Leibler returned
with some disturbing news.
“You’re fired,” he said.
“What? You can’t fire me,” Simons responded. “I’m a
permanent member.”
“Jim, the only difference between a permanent
member and temporary member is a temporary member
has a contract,” Leibler said. “You don’t.”
Simons came home in the middle of the day, shellshocked. Three days later, President Lyndon Johnson
announced the halting of US bombing missions, a sign
the war effort was coming to an end. Simons figured the
news meant he could reclaim his job. Leibler told him
not to bother coming in.
By then, Simons had three young children. He had
little idea what he was going to do next, but getting fired
so abruptly convinced him that he needed to gain some
control over his future. He wasn’t quite sure how,
though. Simons’s minimal-varieties paper was gaining
attention, and he fielded offers from some schools, as
well as companies including IBM. He told Leonard
Charlap, a friend and fellow mathematician, that

teaching mathematics seemed too dull. Simons said he
might join an investment bank to sell convertible bonds.
When Charlap said he didn’t know what convertible
bonds were, Simons launched into a long description.
Charlap was disappointed in his friend. Simons was one
of the world’s premier young mathematicians, not
someone meant to hawk Wall Street’s latest product.
“That’s ridiculous,” Charlap said. “What’s your ideal
job?”
Simons confessed that he’d prefer to chair a large
math department, but he was too young and didn’t know
the right people. Charlap said he had an idea. A bit later,
a letter arrived for Simons from John Toll, president of
SUNY Stony Brook, a public university on Long Island
about sixty miles from New York City. The school had
spent five years searching for someone to lead its math
department. To the extent that the school had a
reputation, it was for having a problem with drug use on
campus.3
“The only thing we had heard was that there were
some drug raids there,” Barbara says.
Toll was determined to change things. A physicist
who had been recruited by New York Governor Nelson
Rockefeller, Toll was leading a $100 million,
government-funded drive to turn the school into the
“Berkeley of the East.” He already had recruited Nobel
Prize–winning physicist Chen Ning Yang and was now
focusing on revitalizing his math department. Toll
offered Simons the position of chairman, dangling the
chance to be his own boss and build the department as
he wished.
“I want it,” Simons told Toll.

=

In 1968, at the age of thirty, Simons moved his family to
Long Island, where he began charming recruits and
building a department. Early on, Simons targeted a
Cornell University mathematician named James Ax,
who, a year earlier, had won the prestigious Cole Prize in
number theory. Ax seemed unlikely to bolt the Ivy
League powerhouse for an unheralded school like Stony
Brook. He had a wife, a young son, and a bright future at
Cornell. But Simons and Ax had been friendly as
graduate students at Berkeley and they had stayed in
touch, giving Simons some hope as he and Barbara drove
five hours northwest to Ithaca, New York, to meet with
the younger mathematician.
Simons wooed Ax, promising him a major salary
increase. Later, he and Barbara hosted Ax and his family
in Stony Brook, where Simons drove his guests to West
Meadow Beach in nearby Brookhaven, on Long Island
Sound, hoping the picturesque views might sway them.
Back in Ithaca, Ax and his wife, also named Barbara,
received care packages from Simons packed with pebbles
and other reminders of Stony Brook’s more temperate
climate.
Ax took his time deliberating, frustrating Simons.
One day, Simons walked into his Stony Brook office in a
tennis outfit, flung his racket to the ground, and told a
colleague, “If this job requires any more ass-licking I’m
out of here!” The entreaties paid off, though. Ax became
the first brand-name academic to join Stony Brook.
“He really wore us down with his little tricks,”
Barbara Ax says.
Ax’s decision sent a message that Simons meant
business. As he raided other schools, Simons refined his
pitch, focusing on what it might take to lure specific
mathematicians. Those who valued money got raises;
those focused on personal research got lighter class
loads, extra leave, generous research support, and help
evading irritating administrative requirements.

“Jim, I don’t want to be on a committee,” one
potential hire told him.
“How about the library committee?” Simons said.
“It’s a committee of one.”
Courting accomplished candidates, Simons
developed a unique perspective on talent. He told one
Stony Brook professor, Hershel Farkas, that he valued
“killers,” those with a single-minded focus who wouldn’t
quit on a math problem until arriving at a solution.
Simons told another colleague that some academics were
“super smart” yet weren’t original thinkers worthy of a
position at the university.
“There are guys and there are real guys,” he said.
Simons worked to create a collegial, stimulating
environment, just as he had enjoyed at the IDA. To keep
his academics happy, Simons kept teaching loads at
reasonable levels and invited colleagues to join him and
Barbara on their newly purchased twenty-three-foot boat
docked on Long Island Sound. Unlike some top-flight
academics, Simons relished interacting with colleagues.
He’d wander into a professor’s office, asking what
projects he was working on and how he could be helpful,
much like he had at the IDA.
“It’s unusual for someone to think of the well-being
of colleagues,” Farkas says.
Simons put mathematicians and students at ease,
dressing more informally than others at the school. He
rarely wore socks, even in the frigid New York winters, a
practice he would continue into his eighties.
“I just decided it takes too much of my time to put
them on,” Simons says.
Simons and Barbara hosted weekly parties at which
academics, artists, and left-leaning intellectuals removed
their shoes and mingled on the Simons’s white shag

carpet, enjoying drinks and chatting about politics and
other topics of the day.
Simons made mistakes—including letting future
Fields Medal winner Shing-Tung Yau get away after the
young geometer demanded tenure—but he assembled
one of the world’s top centers of geometry, hiring twenty
mathematicians while learning to identify the nation’s
best minds and how to recruit and manage them.

=
As Simons’s department expanded, his personal life
came unglued.
Simons’s charisma attracted a range of students to
his office, at all hours. He was receiving acclaim from his
minimal-varieties work and enjoying the power of his
chairmanship amid a period in which sexual norms—and
restraints—were rapidly loosening. A best-selling book of
the time, Open Marriage, encouraged spouses to “strip
marriage of its antiquated ideals” and explore sexual
relationships outside of wedlock. At the same time, the
women’s liberation movement encouraged women to
discard the perceived shackles of society, including
conservative dress and even monogamy.
“There seemed to be a contest among the secretaries
as to who could wear the shortest skirt,” recalls Charlap,
the Stony Brook professor.
Simons was thirty-three years old and feeling restless
once again. Rumors emerged of an extramarital dalliance
with the department’s attractive secretary. At least once,
Simons made a crude joke about a female academic,
surprising his colleagues.
At the time, Barbara felt overshadowed by her
husband’s accomplishments and was frustrated that
early marriage and motherhood had stunted her own
academic career. Barbara was smart and ambitious, but

she had married at eighteen and had a daughter at
nineteen.
“I felt a little trapped,” she says.
One day, Simons heard Barbara was conducting a
relationship with a younger colleague whom Simons had
recruited and mentored. Simons was shaken. At a dinner
party, when someone asked why Simons was so upset,
noting that Jim’s relationship with Barbara hadn’t been
ideal and he didn’t seem especially committed to her, a
drunken Simons slammed his hand against a wall, a
colleague recalls.
Simons decided to take a sabbatical year at the
University of California, Los Angeles, so he could
undergo primal therapy, which was emerging as
something of a cultural phenomenon. The approach
involved screaming or otherwise articulating repressed
pain “primally,” as a newborn emerging from the womb.
Simons, who sometimes woke up screaming at night, was
intrigued by the approach.
After a few weeks of therapy, Simons had second
thoughts. When his instructor suggested he might make
more progress if he used marijuana, Simons decided to
bolt.
This seems like a hoax, he thought.
Simons moved back to the East Coast, spending the
year at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
His marriage with Barbara couldn’t be salvaged, and they
eventually divorced. Barbara would head to UC Berkeley,
where she completed a PhD in computer science in 1981.
In her dissertation, Barbara solved an open problem in
theoretical computer science. She would join IBM as a
researcher and become president of ACM, the largest
educational and scientific computing society. Later,
Barbara emerged as a national expert on the security
problems of computerized voting, demonstrating an

interest in technology and addressing broader societal
challenges that Simons would share.
“We just married too young,” Barbara says. “My
parents were right.”

=
Back on Long Island, this time on his own, Simons
searched for a live-in nanny to lend a hand when his
three children were with him. One day, he interviewed
Marilyn Hawrys, a pretty, twenty-two-year-old blond
who later became a graduate student in economics at
Stony Brook. Shortly after employing Marilyn, Simons
asked her on a date. For a while, the relationship was offand-on. Eventually Marilyn left to become a nanny for
James Ax’s children, helping out as Ax and his wife went
through a painful divorce. Marilyn lived with Barbara Ax
and her two sons, Kevin and Brian, playing late-night
games of Scrabble with the family, cooking a mean mac
and cheese, and providing a shoulder for the kids to cry
on.
“Marilyn was a godsend to all of us,” recalls Ax’s son,
Brian Keating.
Over time, Jim and Marilyn forged a romantic bond.
Marilyn made progress on a PhD in economics, while
Simons enjoyed a breakthrough with Shiing-Shen Chern,
the professor he had followed to UC Berkeley, only to
realize he was on leave.
On his own, Simons made a discovery related to
quantifying shapes in curved, three-dimensional spaces.
He showed his work to Chern, who realized the insight
could be extended to all dimensions. In 1974, Chern and
Simons published “Characteristic Forms and Geometric
Invariants,” a paper that introduced Chern-Simons
invariants—an invariant is a property that remains
unchanged, even while undergoing particular kinds of

transformations—which proved useful in various areas of
mathematics.
In 1976, at the age of thirty-seven, Simons was
awarded the American Mathematical Society’s Oswald
Veblen Prize in Geometry, the highest honor in the field,
for his work with Chern and his earlier research in
minimal varieties. A decade later, theoretical physicist
Edward Witten and others would discover that ChernSimons theory had applications to a range of areas in
physics, including condensed matter, string theory, and
supergravity. It even became crucial to methods used by
Microsoft and others in their attempts to develop
quantum computers capable of solving problems vexing
modern computers, such as drug development and
artificial intelligence. By 2019, tens of thousands of
citations in academic papers—approximately three a day
—referenced Chern-Simons theory, cementing Simons’s
position in the upper echelon of mathematics and
physics.

=
Simons had reached a pinnacle of his profession. Just as
quickly, he drifted from mathematics, desperate for a
new summit to ascend.
In 1974, the floor-tile company Simons had started
with his friends Edmundo Esquenazi and Jimmy Mayer
sold a 50 percent stake, delivering profits to Simons and
the other owners. Simons recommended that Esquenazi,
Mayer, and Victor Shaio invest their money with Charlie
Freifeld, who had taken a course with Simons at
Harvard. An offshore trust Shaio had established for
Simons also placed money with Freifeld.
Freifeld employed a different strategy from most. He
built econometric models to forecast the prices of
commodities, including sugar, using economic and other
data as his inputs. If crop production fell, for example,

Freifeld’s models computed the price rise that likely
would result, an early form of quantitative investing.
Freifeld’s tactics paid off as sugar prices nearly
doubled. The value of the group’s partnership soared,
tenfold, to $6 million. Some of the investors reacted in
unexpected ways to the shocking windfall.
“I was depressed,” says Mayer, Simons’s friend from
Colombia. “We’d made all this money, but there was no
socially redeeming value in what we were doing.”
Simons had a very different response. The rapid-fire
gains got his speculative juices flowing once more,
reminding him of the rush trading could bring. Freifeld’s
style even shared some similarities to the math-based
trading system described by Simons and his colleagues in
their paper at the IDA. He thought using models to trade
was an idea that held promise.
“Jim got the bug,” Mayer says.
Despite his recent acclaim, Simons needed a break
from mathematics. He and Jeff Cheeger, a protégé who
was emerging as a star in the field of geometry, had been
trying to show that certain geometrically defined
numbers, such as pi, are irrational in almost every case.
They weren’t getting anywhere and were growing
frustrated, even hopeless.
“There was bigger game there, and we weren’t able to
get it,” Simons says. “It was driving me crazy.”4
Simons was also dealing with confusion in his
personal life. He was growing closer to Marilyn but was
still pained by the breakup of his marriage. After four
years of dating, Simons confided to a friend that he was
contemplating proposing marriage but was unsure about
getting back into a serious relationship.
“I’ve met this woman; she’s really special,” he told a
friend. “I don’t know what I’m going to do.”

Jim and Marilyn married, but he continued
pondering his life’s direction. Simons reduced his
obligations at Stony Brook to spend half his time trading
currencies for a fund established by Shaio. By 1977,
Simons was convinced currency markets were ripe for
profit. World currencies had begun to float, moving
freely without regard to the price of gold, and the British
pound had tumbled. It seemed to Simons that a new,
volatile era had begun. In 1978, Simons left academia to
start his own investment firm focusing on currency
trading.
Simons’s father told him he was making a big
mistake giving up a tenured position. Mathematicians
were even more shocked. Until then, most had only a
vague awareness that Simons had outside interests. The
idea that he might leave to play the market full-time was
confounding. Mathematicians generally have a
complicated relationship with money; they appreciate
the value of wealth, but many see the pursuit of lucre as a
lowly distraction from their noble calling. Academics
wouldn’t say it to Simons directly, but some were
convinced he was squandering rare talent.
“We looked down on him, like he had been corrupted
and had sold his soul to the devil,” says René Carmona,
who taught at Cornell at the time.
Simons had never completely fit into the world of
academia, though. He loved geometry and appreciated
the beauty of mathematics, but his passion for money,
curiosity about the business world, and need for new
adventures set him apart.
“I’ve always felt like something of an outsider, no
matter what I was doing,” he later would say.5 “I was
immersed in mathematics, but I never felt quite like a
member of the mathematics community. I always had a
foot [outside that world].”

Simons had been a star cryptologist, had scaled the
heights of mathematics, and had built a world-class math
department, all by the age of forty. He was confident he
could conquer the world of trading. Investors had spent
centuries trying to master markets, rarely finding huge
success. Once again, rather than deter Simons, the
challenges seemed to spark enthusiasm.
“He really wanted to do unusual things, things others
didn’t think possible,” his friend Joe Rosenshein says.
Simons would find it harder than he expected.

CHAPTER THREE
Getting fired can be a good thing.
You just don’t want to make a habit of it.
Jim Simons

W tree-lined campus in the early summer of 1978,

eeks after leaving Stony Brook University’s expansive,

Simons found himself just a few miles down the road, yet
a world away.
Simons sat in a storefront office in the back of a
dreary strip mall. He was next to a women’s clothing
boutique, two doors down from a pizza joint, and across
from the tiny, one-story Stony Brook train station. His
space, built for a retail establishment, had beige
wallpaper, a single computer terminal, and spotty phone
service. From his window, Simons could barely see the
aptly named Sheep Pasture Road, an indication of how
quickly he had gone from broadly admired to entirely
obscure.
The odds weren’t in favor of a forty-year-old
mathematician embarking on his fourth career, hoping
to revolutionize the centuries-old world of investing.
Indeed, Simons appeared closer to retirement than any
sort of historic breakthrough. His graying hair was long
and stringy, almost to his shoulders. A slight paunch
made him look even more like an aging professor out of
step with modern finance.
Until then, Simons had dabbled in investing but
hadn’t demonstrated any special talent. Sure, the stake
Simons and his father had in Charlie Freifeld’s
investment partnership had grown to about a million
dollars after Freifeld correctly anticipated a surge in

sugar prices, but disaster had barely been averted. Just
weeks after Freifeld dumped the group’s holdings, sugar
prices had plummeted. Neither Freifeld nor Simons had
anticipated the fall. They had simply agreed to cash out if
they ever scored a substantial profit.
“It was incredible,” Simons says, “but it was
completely lucky.”1
Somehow, Simons was bursting with self-confidence.
He had conquered mathematics, figured out codebreaking, and built a world-class university department.
Now he was sure he could master financial speculation,
partly because he had developed a special insight into
how financial markets operated. Some investors and
academics saw the markets’ zigs and zags as random,
arguing that all possible information was already baked
into prices, so only news, which is impossible to predict,
could push prices higher or lower. Others believed that
price shifts reflected efforts by investors to react to and
predict economic and corporate news, efforts that
sometimes bore fruit.
Simons came from a different world and enjoyed a
unique perspective. He was accustomed to scrutinizing
large data sets and detecting order where others saw
randomness. Scientists and mathematicians are trained
to dig below the surface of the chaotic, natural world to
search for unexpected simplicity, structure, and even
beauty. The emerging patterns and regularities are what
constitute the laws of science.2
Simons concluded that markets didn’t always react in
explainable or rational ways to news or other events,
making it difficult to rely on traditional research, savvy,
and insight. Yet, financial prices did seem to feature at
least some defined patterns, no matter how chaotic
markets appeared, much as the apparent randomness of
weather patterns can mask identifiable trends.

It looks like there’s some structure here, Simons
thought.
He just had to find it.
Simons decided to treat financial markets like any
other chaotic system. Just as physicists pore over vast
quantities of data and build elegant models to identify
laws in nature, Simons would build mathematical
models to identify order in financial markets. His
approach bore similarities to the strategy he had
developed years earlier at the Institute for Defense
Analyses, when he and his colleagues wrote the research
paper that determined that markets existed in various
hidden states that could be identified with mathematical
models. Now Simons would test the approach in real life.
There must be some way to model this, he thought.
Simons named his new investment company
Monemetrics, combining the words “money” and
“econometrics” to indicate that he would use math to
analyze financial data and score trading gains. At the
IDA, Simons had built computer models to spot “signals”
hidden in the noise of the communications of the United
States’ enemies. At Stony Brook, he had identified,
courted, and managed talented mathematicians. Now
Simons would hire a team of big brains to pore through
the market’s data to identify trends and develop
mathematical formulas to profit from them.
Simons wasn’t sure where to start. All he knew was
that currency markets had become unshackled,
presenting profit potential. He did have an ideal partner
in mind for his fledgling firm: Leonard Baum, one of the
co-authors of the IDA research paper and a
mathematician who had spent time discerning hidden
states and making short-term predictions in chaotic
environments. Simons just had to convince Baum to risk
his career on Simons’s radical, unproven approach.

=
Lenny Baum was born in 1931, the son of immigrants
who had fled Russia for Brooklyn to escape rampant
poverty and anti-Semitism. At the age of thirteen,
Lenny’s father, Morris, began work on the floor of a hat
factory, where he eventually became the manager and
owner. As a teenager, Lenny was six feet tall with a barrel
chest, his high school’s top sprinter and a member of its
tennis team, though his delicate hands suggested
someone more comfortable turning the pages of a
textbook than competing on a court.
One day, while visiting nearby Brighton Beach with
friends, Lenny spotted a vivacious and attractive young
woman chatting with friends. Julia Lieberman had come
with her family to the United States at the age of five
from a small village in Czechoslovakia, clutching her
favorite doll as they escaped the Nazis on the last boat
from Europe in 1941. Once in New York, Julia’s father,
Louis, spent months unsuccessfully searching for a job.
Discouraged, he decided to show up at a local factory and
try to blend in with its workers. Louis proved such a
tireless laborer that he was added to the payroll. Later,
Louis operated a laundromat in the family’s small row
house, but the Lieberman family would always struggle
financially.
Lenny and Julia fell in love and eventually married
and moved to Boston, where Lenny attended Harvard
University, graduating in 1953 and then earning a PhD in
mathematics. Julia finished fourth in her class at Boston
University before obtaining a master of arts in education
and history at Harvard. After joining the IDA in
Princeton, Baum was even more successful breaking
code than Simons, receiving credit for some of the unit’s
most important, and still classified, achievements.
“Lenny and some others were definitely higher than
Jim in what we in management used to call ‘lifeboat

order,’” Lee Neuwirth says.
Balding and bearded, Baum pursued math research
while juggling government assignments, just like
Simons. Over the course of several summers in the late
1960s, Baum and Lloyd Welch, an information theorist
working down the hall, developed an algorithm to
analyze Markov chains, which are sequences of events in
which the probability of what happens next depends only
on the current state, not past events. In a Markov chain,
it is impossible to predict future steps with certainty, yet
one can observe the chain to make educated guesses
about possible outcomes. Baseball can be seen as a
Markov game. If a batter has three balls and two strikes,
the order in which they came and the number of fouls in
between don’t matter. If the next pitch is a strike, the
batter is out.
A hidden Markov process is one in which the chain of
events is governed by unknown, underlying parameters
or variables. One sees the results of the chain but not the
“states” that help explain the progression of the chain.
Those not acquainted with baseball might throw their
hands up when receiving updates of the number of runs
scored each inning—one run in this inning, six in
another, with no obvious pattern or explanation. Some
investors liken financial markets, speech recognition
patterns, and other complex chains of events to hidden
Markov models.
The Baum-Welch algorithm provided a way to
estimate probabilities and parameters within these
complex sequences with little more information than the
output of the processes. For the baseball game, the
Baum-Welch algorithm might enable even someone with
no understanding of the sport to guess the game
situations that produced the scores. If there was a
sudden jump from two runs to five runs, for example,
Baum-Welch might suggest the probability that a threerun home run had just been hit rather than a bases-

loaded triple. The algorithm would allow someone to
infer a sense of the sport’s rules from the distribution of
scores, even as the full rules remained hidden.
“The Baum-Welch algorithm gets you closer to the
final answer by giving you better probabilities,” Welch
explains.
Baum usually minimized the importance of his
accomplishment. Today, though, Baum’s algorithm,
which allows a computer to teach itself states and
probabilities, is seen as one of the twentieth century’s
notable advances in machine learning, paving the way
for breakthroughs affecting the lives of millions in fields
from genomics to weather prediction. Baum-Welch
enabled the first effective speech recognition system and
even Google’s search engine.
For all of the acclaim Baum-Welch brought Lenny
Baum, most of the hundreds of other papers he wrote
were classified, which grated on Julia. She came to
believe her husband was getting neither the recognition
nor the pay he deserved. The Baum children had little
idea what their father was up to. The few times they
asked, he told them his work was classified. Baum did
tell them what he wasn’t working on.
“We’re not making bombs,” he reassured his
daughter Stefi one day, as controversy about the Vietnam
War flared.
Unlike Simons, Baum was a homebody who spent
little time socializing, playing poker, or interacting with
others. Most evenings, he sat quietly on a faux-leopardskin couch in his family’s modest Princeton home,
scribbling on a yellow pad with a pencil. When Baum ran
into a particularly challenging problem, he’d stop, gaze
far into the distance, and ponder. Baum fit the stereotype
of an absentminded professor—once, he came to work
with half a beard, explaining that he had become
distracted thinking about mathematics while shaving.

During his tenure at the IDA, Baum had noticed his
eyesight deteriorating. Doctors eventually determined he
suffered from cone-rod dystrophy, a disorder affecting
the cone cells on the retina. Baum found it difficult to
engage in activities requiring visual clarity, such as
tennis. Once, at the net, a ball hit Baum square in the
head. The same thing happened in Ping-Pong; his clear
blue eyes would see the ball for a moment and then lose
it, forcing Baum to drop the sports.
He remained surprisingly upbeat, focusing on
pleasures he still could enjoy, such as walking two miles
a day near the Princeton campus. Grateful he could read
and write, despite the decline of his fine, sharp, straightahead vision, Baum maintained an unbreakable
optimism.
“Let the problem be,” Baum liked to say, usually with
a smile, when his kids came to him with concerns. “It will
solve itself.”
After Simons left the IDA to lead Stony Brook’s
mathematics department, however, the Baum family
began to detect uncharacteristic frustration in their
patriarch. When Baum broke a Russian code and
identified a spy but the FBI proved too slow arresting the
suspect, he expressed irritation. Baum became
discouraged about his unit’s future, writing an internal
memo emphasizing the need for better recruitment.
“It is obvious that the loss of Simons is serious for us,
both because we need him mathematically and because
of the manner of his departure,” Baum wrote, referring
to Simons’s firing. “During the period of seven months
when Simons supposedly wasn’t working on defense
material, he, in fact, did more work on defense projects
than some of our members have done in the last few
years.”3
One day in 1977, Simons reached out to Baum,
asking if he would spend a day at Monemetrics’ office on

Long Island helping Simons set up a trading system to
speculate on currencies. Baum chuckled at the invitation.
He didn’t know much about trading, despite his earlier
theoretical paper with Simons, and cared so little about
investing that he left the family’s portfolio entirely in his
wife’s hands. Nonetheless, Baum agreed to spend some
time assisting Simons, as a favor to his old friend.
At the office, Simons set charts depicting the daily
closing values of various major currencies in front of
Baum, as if he was presenting him with a mathematical
problem. Scrutinizing the data, Baum quickly
determined that, over stretches of time, some currencies,
especially the Japanese yen, seemed to move in steady,
straight lines. Perhaps Simons was right, Baum thought,
there did seem to be some inherent structure in the
markets. Baum hypothesized that the yen’s steady climb
might be due to the Japanese government, under
pressure from foreign nations, intervening to buy the
currency “in precise Japanese manner” to make
Japanese exports a bit less competitive. Either way,
Baum agreed with Simons that a mathematical model
might be developed to map out and ride trends in
various currencies.
Baum began working with Simons once a week. By
1979, Baum, then forty-eight years old, was immersed in
trading, just as Simons had hoped. A top chess player in
college, Baum felt he had discovered a new game to test
his mental faculties. He received a one-year leave of
absence from the IDA and moved his family to Long
Island and a rented, three-bedroom Victorian house
lined with tall bookcases. Because his eyesight had
worsened, Julia drove her husband back and forth to
Simons’s office each day.
“Let’s see if we can make a model,” Simons told him,
as they prepared to focus on markets.
It didn’t take Baum long to develop an algorithm
directing Monemetrics to buy currencies if they moved a

certain level below their recent trend line and sell if they
veered too far above it. It was a simple piece of work, but
Baum seemed on the right path, instilling confidence in
Simons.
“Once I got Lenny involved, I could see the
possibilities of building models,” Simons later said.4
Simons called some friends, including Jimmy Mayer
and Edmundo Esquenazi, asking if they would invest in
his new fund. Simons showed them the same charts he
had presented Baum, wowing them with how much he
and Baum would have made had they used their
mathematics-focused trading strategy over the course of
the previous several years.
“He came with this chart and impressed us with the
possibilities,” Mayer says.
Simons failed to raise the $4 million he was shooting
for, but he came close enough to begin his fund, which
also held his own money. He called his new investment
fund Limroy, an amalgam of Lord Jim, the protagonist of
the Joseph Conrad novel of the same name, and the
Royal Bank of Bermuda, which handled the new
company’s money transfers so that it could glean the
advantages, tax-related and otherwise, of being located
offshore. The name blended high-finance with a
character known for wrestling with ideals of honor and
morality, a fitting choice for someone who long had one
foot in the world of business and another in mathematics
and academia.
Simons decided Limroy would be a hedge fund, a
loosely defined term for private investment partnerships
that manage money for wealthy individuals and
institutions and pursue a variety of strategies, including
trying to hedge, or protect, themselves from losses in the
overall market.
Monemetrics would invest a bit of money for Simons,
testing strategies in a variety of markets. If the tactics

looked profitable, Simons would place the same trades in
Limroy, which was much bigger and would invest for
outsiders as well as for Simons. Baum would share in the
25 percent cut the firm claimed from all its trading
profits.
Simons hoped he and Baum could make big money
relying on a trading style that combined mathematical
models, complicated charts, and a heavy dose of human
intuition. Baum became so certain their approach would
work, and so hooked on investing, that he quit the IDA to
work full-time with Simons.
To make sure he and Baum were on the right track,
Simons asked James Ax, his prized recruit at Stony
Brook, to come by and check out their strategies. Like
Baum a year or so earlier, Ax knew little about investing
and cared even less. He immediately understood what
his former colleagues were trying to accomplish, though,
and became convinced they were onto something special.
Not only could Baum’s algorithm succeed in currencies,
Ax argued, but similar predictive models could be
developed to trade commodities, such as wheat,
soybeans, and crude oil. Hearing that, Simons persuaded
Ax to leave academia, setting him up with his own
trading account. Now Simons was really excited. He had
two of the most acclaimed mathematicians working with
him to unlock the secrets of the markets and enough
cash to support their efforts.
A year or two earlier, Baum couldn’t stop thinking
about math; now it was trading that occupied his mind.
Lying on a beach with his family one morning during the
summer of 1979, Baum mulled the extended weakness in
the value of the British pound. At the time, the
conventional wisdom was that the currency could only
fall in value. One expert who advised Simons and Baum
on their trading made so much selling pounds that he
named his son Sterling.

Relaxing on the beach that morning, Baum sat
straight up, overcome with excitement. He was
convinced a buying opportunity was at hand. Baum
raced to the office, telling Simons that Margaret
Thatcher, Britain’s new prime minister, was keeping the
currency at unsustainably low levels.
“Thatcher is sitting on the pound,” Baum said. “She
can’t hold it down much longer.”
Baum said they needed to buy pounds, but Simons
was amused, rather than swayed, by Baum’s sudden
conviction.
“Lenny, it’s too bad you didn’t come in earlier,”
Simons responded, smiling. “Thatcher stood up. . . . The
pound just rose five cents.”
That morning, it turned out, Thatcher had decided to
let the pound rise in price. Baum was unfazed.
“That’s nothing!” he insisted. “It’s going to go up fifty
cents—maybe more!”5
Baum was right. He and Simons kept buying British
pounds, and the currency kept soaring. They followed
that move with accurate predictions for the Japanese
yen, West German deutsche mark, and Swiss franc, gains
that had the South American investors calling Simons
with congratulations and encouragement as the fund
grew by tens of millions of dollars.
Fellow mathematicians still scratched their heads
about why Simons had discarded a promising career to
sit in a makeshift office trading currency contracts. They
were just as stunned that Baum and Ax had joined him.
Even Simons’s father seemed disappointed. In 1979, at a
bar mitzvah party for Simons’s son Nathaniel, Matty
Simons told a Stony Brook mathematician, “I liked to
say, ‘My son, the professor,’ not ‘My son, the
businessman.’”

Simons spent little time looking back. After racking
up early currency winnings, Simons amended Limroy’s
charter to allow it to trade US Treasury bond futures
contracts as well as commodities. He and Baum—who
now had their own, separate investment accounts—
assembled a small team to build sophisticated models
that might identify profitable trades in currency,
commodity, and bond markets.
Simons was having a blast exploring his lifelong
passion for financial speculation while trying to solve
markets, perhaps the greatest challenge he had
encountered. Besides, he joked, his wife Marilyn at last
could “hang out with people and know what they were
talking about.”6
The fun wouldn’t last.

=
Searching for someone to program his computers,
Simons heard about a nineteen-year-old on the verge of
getting kicked out of the California Institute of
Technology. Greg Hullender was sharp and creative, but
he had trouble focusing on his schoolwork and did
poorly in many of his courses. Later in life, he would be
diagnosed with attention-deficit disorder. At the time,
Hullender was frustrated by his struggles, as were the
school’s administrators. The last straw came when he
was caught running an unauthorized, high-stakes trading
operation out of his dorm room. Friends pooled their
cash and handed it to Hullender, who purchased stock
options before a market rally in 1978, turning $200 into
$2,000 in a matter of days. Soon, everyone in the dorm
wanted in on the operation, throwing money at
Hullender, who began repackaging stock options
purchased through a brokerage account at Merrill Lynch
and reselling them to eager students.

“It was like my own stock exchange,” Hullender says,
with pride.
Merrill Lynch officials weren’t amused by his
ingenuity. Citing Hullender for violating the terms of his
account, the brokerage pulled the plug on his venture
and the school kicked him out. Sitting in his dorm room,
waiting to be expelled, Hullender was startled by a seven
a.m. phone call from Simons. Simons had heard about
Hullender’s unlicensed trading operation through a
Caltech grad student and was impressed by Hullender’s
understanding of financial markets, as well as his moxie.
Simons offered Hullender a salary of $9,000 a year, as
well as a share of his firm’s profits, to come to New York
to program Limroy’s trades.
With a round, cherubic face, shaggy brown hair, and
a boyish smile, Hullender looked like a teenager heading
off to summer camp, not someone cut out for a crosscountry trip to join an unknown trading operation. Railthin with thick, oversize glasses, Hullender kept pens in
his front pocket, along with a brown case for his
spectacles, a look that made him appear especially
guileless.
Hullender hadn’t met Simons or Baum and was wary
of the job offer.
“Jim’s firm sounded like the shadiest thing in the
world,” he says.
The young man didn’t hesitate to accept Simons’s
offer, however.
“I was in my dorm room waiting to get kicked out—
it’s not like I had a lot of options.”
Hullender moved to Long Island, staying with
Simons and his family for several weeks until he rented a
room in a nearby Stony Brook dormitory. The young
man didn’t have a driver’s license, so Simons lent him a
bicycle to get to work. At the office, Simons, wearing his

usual open-collared cotton shirt and loafers, gave
Hullender a tutorial on how he approached trading.
Currency markets are affected by the actions of
governments and others, Simons told him, and his firm
hoped to develop detailed, step-by-step algorithms to
identify “trends that result from hidden actors
influencing the market,” not unlike what Simons did at
the IDA to break enemy code.
Hullender began by writing a program to track the
new firm’s results. Within six months, Hullender’s
figures showed disturbing losses—Simons’s shift to bond
trading had gone awry. Clients kept calling, but now they
were asking why they were losing so much money, rather
than extending congratulations.
Simons seemed to take the downturn hard, growing
more anxious as the losses increased. On one especially
rough day, Hullender found his boss lying supine on a
couch in his office. Hullender sensed Simons wanted to
open up to him, perhaps even make some kind of
confession.
“Sometimes I look at this and feel I’m just some guy
who doesn’t really know what he’s doing,” Simons said.
Hullender was startled. Until that moment, Simons’s
self-confidence seemed boundless. Now he appeared to
be second-guessing his decision to ditch mathematics to
try to beat the market. Still on the couch, as if in a
therapist’s office, Simons told Hullender about Lord Jim,
which centers on failure and redemption. Simons had
been fascinated with Jim, a character who had a high
opinion of himself and yearned for glory but failed
miserably in a test of courage, condemning himself to a
life filled with shame.
Simons sat up straight and turned to Hullender.
“He had a really good death, though,” he said. “Jim
died nobly.”

Wait, is Simons contemplating suicide?
Hullender worried about his boss—and about his
own future. Hullender realized he had no money, was
alone on the East Coast, and had a boss on a couch
talking about death. Hullender tried reassuring Simons,
but the conversation turned awkward.
In the following days, Simons emerged from his
funk, more determined than ever to build a high-tech
trading system guided by algorithms, or step-by-step
computer instructions, rather than human judgment.
Until then, Simons and Baum had relied on crude
trading models, as well as their own instincts, an
approach that had left Simons in crisis. He sat down with
Howard Morgan, a technology expert he’d hired to invest
in stocks, and shared a new goal: building a sophisticated
trading system fully dependent on preset algorithms that
might even be automated.
“I don’t want to have to worry about the market
every minute. I want models that will make money while
I sleep,” Simons said. “A pure system without humans
interfering.”
The technology for a fully automated system wasn’t
there yet, Simons realized, but he wanted to try some
more sophisticated methods. He suspected he’d need
reams of historic data, so his computers could search for
persistent and repeating price patterns across a large
swath of time. Simons bought stacks of books from the
World Bank and elsewhere, along with reels of magnetic
tape from various commodity exchanges, each packed
with commodity, bond, and currency prices going back
decades, some to before World War II. This was ancient
stuff that almost no one cared about, but Simons had a
hunch it might prove valuable.
Hullender’s five-foot-tall, blue-and-white PDP-11/60
computer couldn’t read some of the older data Simons
was amassing because its formatting was outdated, so

Hullender surreptitiously carried the reels to the nearby
headquarters of Grumman Aerospace, where his friend
Stan worked. Around midnight, when things slowed
down at the defense contractor, Stan let Hullender fire
up a supercomputer and spend hours converting the
reels so they could be read on Simons’s computer. As the
reels spun, the friends caught up over coffee.
To gather additional data, Simons had a staffer travel
to lower Manhattan to visit the Federal Reserve office to
painstakingly record interest-rate histories and other
information not yet available electronically. For more
recent pricing data, Simons tasked his former Stony
Brook secretary and new office manager, Carole
Alberghine, with recording the closing prices of major
currencies. Each morning, Alberghine would go through
the Wall Street Journal and then climb on sofas and
chairs in the firm’s library room to update various figures
on graph paper hanging from the ceiling and taped to the
walls. (The arrangement worked until Alberghine
toppled from her perch, pinching a nerve and suffering
permanent injury, after which Simons enlisted a younger
woman to scale the couches and update the numbers.)
Simons recruited his sister-in-law and others to
input the prices into the database Hullender created to
track prices and test various trading strategies based on
both mathematical insights and the intuitions of Simons,
Baum, and others. Many of the tactics they tried focused
on various momentum strategies, but they also looked
for potential correlations between commodities. If a
currency went down three days in a row, what were the
odds of it going down a fourth day? Do gold prices lead
silver prices? Might wheat prices predict gold and other
commodity prices? Simons even explored whether
natural phenomena affected prices. Hullender and the
team often came up empty, unable to prove reliable
correlations, but Simons pushed them to keep searching.

“There’s a pattern here; there has to be a pattern,”
Simons insisted.
Eventually, the group developed a system that could
dictate trades for various commodity, bond, and
currency markets. The office’s single computer wasn’t
powerful enough to incorporate all the data, but it could
identify a few reliable correlations.
The trading system had live hogs as a component, so
Simons named it his “Piggy Basket.” The group built it to
digest masses of data and make trading
recommendations using the tools of linear algebra. The
Piggy Basket produced a row of numbers. The sequence
“0.5, 0.3, 0.2,” for example, would signify that the
currency portfolio should be 50 percent yen, 30 percent
deutsche marks, and 20 percent Swiss francs. After the
Piggy Basket churned out its recommendations for about
forty different futures contracts, a staffer would get in
touch with the firm’s broker and deliver buy-and-sell
instructions based on those proportions. The system
produced automated trade recommendations, rather
than automated trades, but it was the best Simons could
do at the time.
For a few months, the Piggy Basket scored big
profits, trading about $1 million of Monemetrics’ money.
The team generally held its positions for a day or so, then
sold them. Encouraged by the early results, Simons
transferred several million dollars of additional cash
from the Limroy account into the model, scoring even
larger gains.
Then, something unexpected happened. The
computerized system developed an unusual appetite for
potatoes, shifting two-thirds of its cash into futures
contracts on the New York Mercantile Exchange that
represented millions of pounds of Maine potatoes. One
day, Simons got a call from unhappy regulators at the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission: Monemetrics

was close to cornering the global market for these
potatoes, they said, with some alarm.
Simons had to stifle a giggle. Yes, the regulators were
grilling him, but they had to realize Simons hadn’t meant
to accumulate so many potatoes; he couldn’t even
understand why his computer system was buying so
many of them. Surely, the CFTC would understand that.
“They think we’re trying to corner the market on
spuds!” he told Hullender, with some amusement, after
hanging up the phone.
The regulators somehow missed the humor in
Simons’s misadventure. They closed out his potato
positions, costing Simons and his investors millions of
dollars. Soon, he and Baum had lost confidence in their
system. They could see the Piggy Basket’s trades and
were aware when it made and lost money, but Simons
and Baum weren’t sure why the model was making its
trading decisions. Maybe a computerized trading model
wasn’t the way to go, after all, they decided.
In 1980, Hullender quit to go back to school. Leaving
college prematurely weighed on him, and he was
ashamed he couldn’t help Simons make more progress
on his computerized trading system. Hullender couldn’t
understand the math Simons and Baum were using, and
he was lonely and miserable. Weeks earlier, he had
revealed to colleagues that he was gay. They tried to
make him comfortable, but the young man felt
increasingly out of place.
“I just felt I had a better chance meeting someone
compatible in California,” says Hullender, who
eventually earned his degree and became a machinelearning specialist for Amazon and Microsoft. “Some
things are more important than money.”

=

With Hullender gone and the Piggy Basket
malfunctioning, Simons and Baum drifted from
predictive mathematical models to a more traditional
trading style. They began looking for undervalued
investments while reacting to market-moving news,
investing $30 million in various markets.
Simons thought it might help if they could get their
hands on news from Europe before their rivals, so he
hired a Parisian studying at Stony Brook to read an
obscure French financial newsletter and translate it
before others had a chance. Simons also consulted with
an economist named Alan Greenspan, who later would
become Federal Reserve chair. At one point, Simons set
up a red phone in his office that rang whenever urgent
financial news broke, so he and Baum could enter trades
before others. Sometimes the phone rang and they were
nowhere to be found, sending new office manager Penny
Alberghine, Carole’s sister-in-law, racing to find them, be
it in a local restaurant or shop or even the men’s room,
where she’d pound on the door to get their attention.
“Come back in!” Alberghine screamed once. “Wheat’s
down thirty points!”
Simons’s cheeky, irreverent sense of humor put his
team at ease. He’d tease Alberghine about her thick New
York accent, and she’d mock the remains of his Boston
inflection. Once, Simons became elated when he received
an especially high interest rate for money the firm held
in a bank account.
“Investors are getting eleven and seven-fuckingeighths!” he exclaimed.
When a young employee gasped at his blue language,
Simons flashed a grin.
“I know—that is an impressive rate!”
A few times a week, Marilyn came by to visit, usually
with their baby, Nicholas. Other times, Barbara checked

in on her ex-husband. Other employees’ spouses and
children also wandered around the office. Each
afternoon, the team met for tea in the library, where
Simons, Baum, and others discussed the latest news and
debated the direction of the economy. Simons also
hosted staffers on his yacht, The Lord Jim, docked in
nearby Port Jefferson.
Most days, Simons sat in his office, wearing jeans
and a golf shirt, staring at his computer screen,
developing new trades—reading the news and predicting
where markets were going, like most everyone else.
When he was especially engrossed in thought, Simons
would hold a cigarette in one hand and chew on his
cheek. Baum, in a smaller, nearby office, trading his own
account, favored raggedy sweaters, wrinkled trousers,
and worn Hush Puppies shoes. To compensate for his
worsening eyesight, he hunched close to his computer,
trying to ignore the smoke wafting through the office
from Simons’s cigarettes.
Their traditional trading approach was going so well
that, when the boutique next door closed, Simons rented
the space and punched through the adjoining wall. The
new space was filled with offices for new hires, including
an economist and others who provided expert
intelligence and made their own trades, helping to boost
returns. At the same time, Simons was developing a new
passion: backing promising technology companies,
including an electronic dictionary company called
Franklin Electronic Publishers, which developed the first
hand-held computer.
In 1982, Simons changed Monemetrics’ name to
Renaissance Technologies Corporation, reflecting his
developing interest in these upstart companies. Simons
came to see himself as a venture capitalist as much as a
trader. He spent much of the week working in an office
in New York City, where he interacted with his hedge

fund’s investors while also dealing with his tech
companies.
Simons also took time to care for his children, one of
whom needed extra attention. Paul, Simons’s second
child with Barbara, had been born with a rare hereditary
condition called ectodermal dysplasia. Paul’s skin, hair,
and sweat glands didn’t develop properly, he was short
for his age, and his teeth were few and misshapen. To
cope with the resulting insecurities, Paul asked his
parents to buy him stylish and popular clothing in the
hopes of fitting in with his grade-school peers.
Paul’s challenges weighed on Simons, who
sometimes drove Paul to Trenton, New Jersey, where a
pediatric dentist made cosmetic improvements to Paul’s
teeth. Later, a New York dentist fitted Paul with a
complete set of implants, improving his self-esteem.
Baum was fine with Simons working from the New
York office, dealing with his outside investments, and
tending to family matters. Baum didn’t need much help.
He was making so much money trading various
currencies using intuition and instinct that pursuing a
systematic, “quantitative” style of trading seemed a waste
of time. Building formulas was difficult and timeconsuming, and the gains figured to be steady but never
spectacular. By contrast, quickly digesting the office’s
news ticker, studying newspaper articles, and analyzing
geopolitical events seemed exciting and far more
profitable.
“Why do I need to develop those models?” Baum
asked his daughter Stefi. “It’s so much easier making
millions in the market than finding mathematical proof.”
Simons respected Baum too much to tell him how to
trade. Besides, Baum was on a roll, and the firm’s
computer firepower was limited, making any kind of
automated system likely impossible to implement.

Baum liked to pore over economic and other data,
close the door to his office, and lie back on his green sofa,
reflecting for long periods on his next market move.
“He’d lose track of time,” Penny Alberghine says. “He
was a bit spacey.”
When Baum emerged, he usually placed buy orders.
An optimist by nature, Baum liked to purchase
investments and sit on them until they rose, no matter
how long it took. Courage was needed to hold on to
investment positions, Baum told friends, and he was
proud he didn’t buckle when others grew weak in the
knees.
“If I don’t have a reason for doing something, I leave
things as they are and do nothing,” he wrote to family
members, explaining his trading tactics.
“Dad’s theory was buy low and hold on forever,” Stefi
says.
The strategy enabled Baum to ride out market
turbulence and rack up more than $43 million in profits
between July 1979 and March 1982, nearly double his
original stake from Simons. In the latter year, Baum
grew so bullish about stocks that he insisted on missing
the firm’s annual outing on Simons’s yacht, preferring to
monitor the market and buy more stock futures. Around
noon, when Baum grudgingly joined his colleagues,
Simons asked why he looked so glum.
“I got half of what I wanted,” Baum said. “Then I had
to come to this lunch.”
Baum probably should have stayed in the office. He
had correctly identified that year’s historic bottoming out
of the US stock market. As stocks soared and his profits
piled up, Lenny and Julia purchased a six-bedroom,
turn-of-the-century home on Long Island Sound. Julia
still drove an old Cadillac, but she no longer worried
about money. The trading life had a less salutary impact

on her husband, despite his mounting gains. Once
relaxed and upbeat, Baum turned serious and intense,
fielding calls from Simons and others well into the
evening as they debated how to react to news of the day.
“He was like a different person,” Stefi recalls.

=
Baum’s penchant for holding on to investments
eventually caused a rift with Simons. The tension started
back in the fall of 1979, when they each purchased goldfutures contracts at around $250 an ounce. Late that
year, the Iranian government took fifty-two American
diplomats and citizens hostage and Russia invaded
Afghanistan to support that country’s communist
regime. The resulting geopolitical jitters pushed gold and
silver prices higher. Visitors to the Long Island office
watched as Baum, normally quiet and introspective,
stood, exuberantly cheering gold higher. Simons sat
nearby, smiling.
By January 1980, gold and silver prices were soaring.
When gold topped $700 in a frenzied two-week period,
Simons dumped his position, locking in millions of
dollars of profits. As usual, Baum couldn’t bear to sell.
One day, Simons was speaking with a friend who
mentioned that his wife, a jeweler, was rifling through
his closet, removing gold cuff links and tie clips to sell.
“Are you going broke or something?” Simons asked
with concern.
“No—she can cut the line to sell,” the friend
responded.
“There’s a line to sell gold?”
The friend explained that people around the country
were queuing up to sell jewelry, taking advantage of
surging prices. Simons turned scared; if the supply of
gold was swelling, that could crush prices.

Back in the office, Simons gave Baum an order.
“Lenny, sell right now.”
“No—the trend will continue.”
“Sell the fucking gold, Lenny!”
Baum ignored Simons, driving him crazy. Baum was
sitting on more than $10 million of profits, gold had
skyrocketed past $800 an ounce, and he was sure more
gains were ahead.
“Jim nagged me,” Baum later told his family. “But I
couldn’t find any specific reason or news for action, so I
did nothing.”
Finally, on January 18, Simons dialed the firm’s
broker and pressed the phone to Baum’s ear.
“Tell him you’re selling, Lenny!”
“Alright, alright,” Baum grumbled.
Within months, gold had raced past $865 an ounce,
and Baum was bitterly complaining that Simons had cost
him serious money. Then the bubble burst; just a few
months later, gold was under $500 an ounce.
A bit later, Baum discovered a native of Colombia
who worked at the brokerage firm E. F. Hutton and
claimed to have insights into the coffee-futures market.
When the Colombian predicted higher prices, Baum and
Simons built some of the largest positions in the entire
market. Almost immediately, coffee prices dropped 10
percent, costing them millions. Once again, Simons
dumped his holdings but Baum couldn’t bear selling.
Eventually, Baum lost so much money he had to ask
Simons to get rid of the coffee investment for him; he
was unable to do it himself. Baum later described the
episode as “the dumbest thing I ever did in this
business.”
Baum’s eternal optimism was beginning to wear on
Simons.

“He had the buy-low part, but he didn’t always have
the sell-high part,” Simons later said.7
By 1983, Baum and his family had moved to
Bermuda, where they enjoyed the island’s idyllic weather
and favorable tax laws. The island’s beauty reinforced
Baum’s upbeat nature and bullish instincts. US inflation
seemed under control, and Federal Reserve Chair Paul
Volcker predicted a decline in interest rates, so Baum
purchased tens of millions of dollars of US bonds, an
ideal investment for that kind of environment.
But panic selling overcame the bond market in the
late spring of 1984 amid surging bond issuance by the
administration of President Ronald Reagan and rapid US
economic growth. As his losses grew, Baum maintained
his typical equanimity, but Simons feared the troubles
could take the firm down.
“Lighten up, Lenny. Don’t be stubborn,” Simons said.
Baum’s losses kept growing. A huge wager that the
yen would continue to appreciate also backfired, placing
Baum under even more pressure.
“This cannot continue!” Baum said one day, staring
at his computer screen.
When the value of Baum’s investment positions had
plummeted 40 percent, it triggered an automatic clause
in his agreement with Simons, forcing Simons to sell all
of Baum’s holdings and unwind their trading affiliation,
a sad denouement to a decades-long relationship
between the esteemed mathematicians.
Ultimately, Baum proved prescient. In subsequent
years, both interest rates and inflation tumbled,
rewarding bond investors. By then, Baum was trading for
himself, and he and Julia had returned to Princeton. The
years with Simons had been filled with such stress that
Baum rarely enjoyed a full night’s sleep. Now he was
rested and had time to return to mathematics. As he

grew older, Baum focused on prime numbers and an
unsolved and well-known problem, the Riemann
hypothesis. For fun, he traveled the country competing
in Go tournaments, memorizing the board or standing
over it to compensate for his ever-declining eyesight.
In his eighties, Baum enjoyed walking two miles
from his home to Witherspoon Street, near Princeton
University’s campus, stopping to smell budding flowers
along the way. Passing drivers sometimes slowed to offer
assistance to the slow, well-dressed older gentleman, but
he always declined the help. Baum would spend hours
sitting in the sun at coffee shops, striking up
conversations with strangers. Family members
sometimes found him gently comforting homesick
undergraduates. In the summer of 2017, weeks after
finalizing his latest mathematics paper, Baum passed
away at the age of eighty-six. His children published the
paper posthumously.

=
Baum’s losses in the 1984 trading debacle left deep scars
on Simons. He halted his firm’s trading and held
disgruntled investors at bay. Once staffers eagerly
greeted the frequent calls from Simons’s friends, who
asked, “How are we doing?” Now that the fund was
losing millions of dollars daily, Simons instituted a new
rule with clients—no performance results until the end of
each month.
The losses had been so upsetting that Simons
contemplated giving up trading to focus on his
expanding technology businesses. Simons gave clients
the opportunity to withdraw their money. Most showed
faith, hoping Simons could figure out a way to improve
the results, but Simons himself was racked with selfdoubt.

The setback was “stomach-wrenching,” he told a
friend. “There’s no rhyme or reason.”
Simons had to find a different approach.

CHAPTER FOUR
Truth . . . is much too complicated to allow
for anything but approximations.
John von Neumann

J

im Simons was miserable.

He hadn’t abandoned a flourishing academic
career to deal with sudden losses and grumpy investors.
Simons had to find a different method to speculate on
financial markets; Lenny Baum’s approach, reliant on
intellect and instinct, just didn’t seem to work. It also left
Simons deeply unsettled.
“If you make money, you feel like a genius,” he told a
friend. “If you lose, you’re a dope.”
Simons called Charlie Freifeld, the investor who had
made him a millionaire speculating on sugar contracts,
to share his frustrations.
“It’s just too hard to do it this way,” Simons said,
sounding exasperated. “I have to do it mathematically.”
Simons wondered if the technology was yet available
to trade using mathematical models and preset
algorithms, to avoid the emotional ups and downs that
come with betting on markets with only intelligence and
intuition. Simons still had James Ax working for him, a
mathematician who seemed perfectly suited to build a
pioneering computer trading system. Simons resolved to
back Ax with ample support and resources, hoping
something special would emerge.
For a while, it seemed an investing revolution was at
hand.

=
No one understood why James Ax was always so angry.
There was the time he drove his foot through a
department wall, the fistfight he started with a fellow
mathematician, and the invective he regularly directed at
colleagues. Ax squabbled about credit due, seethed if
someone let him down, and shouted if he didn’t get his
way.
The rage didn’t make much sense. Ax was an
acclaimed mathematician with chiseled good looks and a
biting sense of humor. He enjoyed professional success
and acclaim from his peers. Yet, most days, Ax was a
disagreement away from a frightening eruption of pique
and dudgeon.
His gifts emerged at a young age. Born in the Bronx,
Ax attended Stuyvesant High School in lower
Manhattan, New York City’s most prestigious public
school. Later, he graduated with high honors from the
Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, a school claiming
notable contributions to the development of microwave
physics, radar, and the US space program.
Ax concealed deep suffering that wasn’t immediately
apparent amid his academic achievement. When he was
seven, his father had abandoned the family, leaving the
boy disconsolate. Growing up, Ax battled constant
stomach pain and fatigue. It took doctors until his late
teens to deliver a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease,
prompting a series of treatments that helped ameliorate
his condition.
In 1961, Ax earned a PhD in mathematics from the
University of California, Berkeley, where he became
friends with Simons, a fellow graduate student. Ax was
the first to greet Simons and his wife in the hospital after
Barbara gave birth to their first child. As a mathematics
professor at Cornell University, Ax helped develop a

branch of pure mathematics called number theory. In the
process, he forged a close bond with a senior, tenured
academic named Simon Kochen, a mathematical
logician. Together, the professors tried to prove a famous
fifty-year-old conjecture made by the famed Austrian
mathematician Emil Artin, meeting immediate and
enduring frustration. To blow off steam, Ax and Kochen
initiated a weekly poker game with colleagues and others
in the Ithaca, New York, area. What started as friendly
get-togethers, with winning pots that rarely topped
fifteen dollars, grew in intensity until the men fought
over stakes reaching hundreds of dollars.
Ax was a decent poker player, but he couldn’t find a
way to beat Kochen. Growing more infuriated with each
loss, Ax became convinced Kochen was gaining a crucial
advantage by reading his facial expressions. Ax had to
hide his tell. One summer evening, as the poker players
sat down to play in a brutal heat wave, Ax showed up
wearing a heavy, woolen ski mask to conceal his face.
Sweating profusely and barely able to see through the
mask’s narrow openings, Ax somehow lost to Kochen
again. Ax stalked away from the game, fuming, never to
uncover Kochen’s secret.
“It wasn’t his face,” Kochen says. “Jim tended to
straighten up in his chair when he had a good hand.”
Ax spent the 1970s searching for new rivals and ways
to best them. In addition to poker, he took up golf and
bowling, while emerging as one of the nation’s top
backgammon players.
“Jim was a restless man with a restless mind,”
Kochen says.
Ax focused the bulk of his energies on math, a world
that is more competitive than most realize.
Mathematicians usually enter the field out of a love for
numbers, structures, or models, but the real thrill often
comes from being the first to make a discovery or

advance. Andrew Wiles, the Princeton mathematician
famous for proving the Fermat conjecture, describes
mathematics as a journey through “a dark unexplored
mansion,” with months, or even years, spent “stumbling
around.” Along the way, pressures emerge. Math is
considered a young person’s game—those who don’t
accomplish something of significance in their twenties or
early thirties can see their chances slip away.1
Even as Ax made progress in his career, anxieties and
irritations built. One day, after complaining bitterly to
Kochen that his office was too close to the department’s
bathroom and that sounds from inside were interfering
with his concentration, Ax drove a boot through the wall
between his office and the bathroom, leaving a gaping
hole. He had successfully proved how flimsy the wall
was, but Ax could now hear each toilet flush even more
clearly than before. To tweak Ax, the professors
preserved the opening, further riling him.
As Kochen got to know Ax and became aware of the
pain of his early years, Kochen adopted a more generous
attitude toward his colleague. Ax’s fury stemmed from
deep insecurities, Kochen argued to others, not outright
cruelty, and his unhappiness often dissipated quickly.
Kochen and Ax became close friends, as did their wives.
Eventually, the mathematicians introduced an elegant
solution to their long-running mathematical challenge,
an advance that became known as the Ax-Kochen
theorem. In some ways, their approach was more
startling than their accomplishment; until then, no one
had used the techniques of mathematical logic to solve
problems in number theory.
“The methods we used were from left field,” Kochen
says.
In 1967, the theorem, described in three innovative
papers, won Kochen and Ax the Frank Nelson Cole Prize
in number theory, among the top honors in the field and
an award given out just once every five years. Ax received

a fair amount of acclaim, and the university promoted
him to full professor in 1969. At twenty-nine, Ax was the
youngest ever to hold that title at Cornell.
That was the year Ax received a call from Simons
inviting him to join Stony Brook’s growing mathematics
department. Ax was born and raised in New York City,
but he was drawn to the calm of the ocean, perhaps the
result of the early upheaval in his life. At the same time,
his wife, Barbara, had grown weary of Ithaca’s brutal
winters.
After Ax left for Stony Brook, Cornell threatened to
register a protest with Governor Rockefeller if Simons
raided any more of the university’s faculty members, a
sign of the dismay the Ivy League school felt about losing
its celebrated mathematician.
Soon after arriving at Stony Brook, Ax told a
colleague that mathematicians do their best work by the
age of thirty, a possible indication he was feeling
pressure to top his early success. Colleagues sensed that
Ax was disappointed that his work with Kochen hadn’t
resulted in sufficient adulation. Ax’s publication rate
dwindled and he threw himself into poker, chess, and
even fishing, searching for distractions from
mathematics.
Battling clear signs of depression, Ax engaged in
frequent arguments with his wife, Barbara. Like others in
the department, Ax had wed at a young age, before the
decade’s period of sexual liberation and experimentation
had begun. As Ax let his hair grow and began favoring
tight-fitting jeans, rumors emerged of his infidelities.
Others with two young children might have worked on
their marriage for the sake of the kids, but fatherhood
didn’t come easily to Ax.
“I like kids,” he said with a lingering Bronx accent,
“once they learn algebra.”

After Ax’s divorce turned bitter and he lost custody of
his sons, Kevin and Brian, he had little to do with the
boys. Ax seemed in a perpetual dark mood. At
department meetings, he interrupted colleagues so
frequently that Leonard Charlap began carrying a bell, so
he could ring it each time Ax cut someone off.
“What the hell are you doing?” Ax screamed one day.
When Charlap explained the bell’s purpose, Ax
stormed out, leaving his co-workers in laughter.
Another time, Ax got into a fistfight with an associate
professor, forcing colleagues to pull him off the younger
colleague. Ax’s incessant needling had convinced the
younger professor that Ax would block his promotion,
sparking tension.
“I could have been killed!” the younger professor
screamed at Ax.
Despite the interpersonal drama, Ax’s reputation in
the field remained such that Michael Fried, a young
professor, turned down a tenured position at the
University of Chicago to join Ax at Stony Brook. Ax
respected Fried’s abilities and seemed taken with the
mathematician’s natural magnetism. Fried was a
muscular, six-foot athlete with wavy auburn hair and a
thin mustache, the closest the math world could expect
to come to the macho-man look sweeping the country in
the early 1970s. At department parties, women swooned;
Ax, newly divorced, seemed to take note, Fried recalls.
“It was almost as if Ax invited me there to attract
women,” he says.
Their relationship frayed, however, as Fried
suspected Ax was appropriating his work without
sharing proper credit. For his part, Ax believed Fried
wasn’t showing him the appropriate amount of respect
around other academics. At a grievance-airing meeting

with Fried, Simons, and a Stony Brook administrator, Ax
got in Fried’s face to deliver an ominous vow.
“I’m going to do everything I can to ruin your career,
fair or foul,” Ax foamed.
Stunned, Fried couldn’t muster much of a comeback.
“Forget it,” Fried responded.
He walked out, never to speak to Ax again.

=
When Simons first talked to Ax about joining his trading
venture, in 1978, Ax viewed financial markets as a bit
boring. He changed his mind after visiting Simons’s
office and getting a look at Baum’s early trading models.
Simons portrayed investing as the ultimate puzzle,
promising to back Ax with his own account if he left
academia to focus on trading. Eager for fresh
competition and in need of a break from academia, Ax
wondered if he could beat the market.
In 1979, Ax joined Simons in his strip-mall office
near the pizza parlor and the women’s clothing store. At
first, Ax focused on the market’s fundamentals, such as
whether demand for soybeans would grow or a severe
weather pattern would affect the supply of wheat. Ax’s
returns weren’t remarkable, so he began developing a
trading system to take advantage of his math
background. Ax mined the assorted data Simons and his
team had collected, crafting algorithms to predict where
various currencies and commodities were headed.
His early research wasn’t especially original. Ax
identified slight upward trends in a number of
investments and tested if their average price over the
previous ten, fifteen, twenty, or fifty days was predictive
of future moves. It was similar to the work of other
traders, often called trenders, who examine moving

averages and jump on market trends, riding them until
they peter out.
Ax’s predictive models had potential, but they were
quite crude. The trove of data Simons and others had
collected proved of little use, mostly because it was
riddled with errors and faulty prices. Also, Ax’s trading
system wasn’t in any way automated—his trades were
made by phone, twice a day, in the morning and at the
end of the trading day.
To gain an edge on his rivals, Ax began relying on a
former professor with hidden talents soon to be revealed.

=
A native of Philadelphia, Sandor Straus earned a PhD in
mathematics from Berkeley in 1972 and moved to Long
Island for a teaching job in Stony Brook’s math
department. Outgoing and gregarious, Straus received
strong reviews for his teaching and thrived among
colleagues who shared his passion for mathematics and
computers. Straus even looked the part of a successful
academic of the era. An unabashed liberal who had met
his wife, Faye, at an antiwar rally during Eugene
McCarthy’s presidential campaign in 1968, Straus, like
many other men on campus, wore round, John Lennon–
style glasses and combed his long brown hair back in a
ponytail.
Over time, however, Straus began worrying about his
future. He sensed he was a subpar mathematician and
knew he was inept at department politics. Ill equipped to
jostle with fellow mathematicians for funding for
projects of interest, Straus understood he had little
chance of obtaining tenure at Stony Brook or another
school with a respected math department.
In 1976, Straus joined Stony Brook’s computer
center, where he helped Ax and other faculty members
develop computer simulations. Straus was making an

annual salary of less than $20,000, had little
opportunity for advancement, and was unsure about his
future.
“I wasn’t super happy,” he says.
In the spring of 1980, as Hullender prepared to leave
Monemetrics, Ax recommended the firm hire Straus as
its new computer specialist. Impressed with Straus’s
credentials and a bit desperate to fill the hole Hullender
was leaving, Simons offered to double Straus’s salary.
Straus was torn—he was thirty-five years old, and the
computer-center salary made it difficult to support his
wife and one-year-old baby. But he thought if he hung on
for another couple of years he might receive the
equivalent of tenure at the university. Straus’s father and
friends gave the same advice: Don’t even consider giving
up a steady job to join a no-name trading firm that might
fold.
Straus ignored the advice and accepted Simons’s
offer, but he hedged his bet, requesting a one-year leave
of absence from Stony Brook rather than resigning
outright. Greeting the new hire, Ax asked for help
building his computer models. Ax said he wanted to
invest in commodity, currency, and bond futures based
on technical analysis, an age-old craft that aims to make
forecasts based on patterns in past market data. Ax
directed Straus to dig up all the historic information he
could to improve his predictive models.
As Straus searched for pricing data, he ran into
problems. At the time, the Telerate machines dominating
trading floors didn’t have an interface enabling investors
to collect and analyze the information. (A few years later,
a laid-off businessman named Michael Bloomberg would
introduce a competing machine with those capabilities
and much more.)
Piecing together a custom-built database, Straus
purchased historic commodity-price data on magnetic

tape from an Indiana-based firm called Dunn & Hargitt,
then merged it with the historic information others in
the firm already had amassed. For more recent figures,
Straus got his hands on opening and closing prices for
each day’s session, along with high and low figures.
Eventually, Straus discovered a data feed that had tick
data, the intra-day fluctuations of various commodities
and other futures trades. Using an Apple II computer,
Straus and others wrote a program to collect and store
their growing data trove.
No one had asked Straus to track down so much
information. Opening and closing prices seemed
sufficient to Simons and Ax. They didn’t even have a way
to use all the data Straus was gathering, and with
computer-processing power still limited, that didn’t
seem likely to change. But Straus figured he’d continue
collecting the information in case it came in handy down
the road.
Straus became somewhat obsessive in his quest to
locate pricing data before others realized its potential
value. Straus even collected information on stock trades,
just in case Simons’s team wanted it at some point in the
future. For Straus, gathering data became a matter of
personal pride.
Looking over his mounds of data, though, Straus
became concerned. Over long stretches of time, some
commodity prices didn’t seem to move. That didn’t seem
to make sense—twenty minutes and not a single trade?
There was even an odd gap, years earlier, when there was
no futures trading in Chicago over a period of a couple of
days, even though there was activity in other markets
during that time. (It turned out a major flood had
suspended Chicago trading.)
The inconsistencies bothered Straus. He hired a
student to write computer programs to detect unusual
spikes, dips, or gaps in their collection of prices. Working
in a small, windowless office next to Ax and down a

spiral staircase from Simons, Straus began the
painstaking work of checking his prices against
yearbooks produced by commodity exchanges, futures
tables, and archives of the Wall Street Journal and other
newspapers, as well as other sources. No one had told
Straus to worry so much about the prices, but he had
transformed into a data purist, foraging and cleaning
data the rest of the world cared little about.
Some people take years to identify a profession for
which they are naturally suited; others never make the
discovery. Straus had certain gifts that were only now
being revealed. In almost any other trading firm or
previous era, his fixation on accurate pricing information
would have seemed out of place, maybe even a bit kooky.
But Straus saw himself as an explorer on the trail of
untold riches with almost no one in pursuit. Some other
traders were gathering and cleaning data, but no one
collected as much as Straus, who was becoming
something of a data guru. Energized by the challenge and
opportunity, he came to an obvious career decision.
I’m not going back to that computer center.

=
Straus’s data helped Ax improve his trading results,
putting him in rare spirits as he became increasingly
optimistic about their methods. Ax still gambled, played
in a racquetball league, and bowled, mind you. He also
traveled to Las Vegas, where he captured third place in
backgammon’s World Amateur Championship, earning a
mention in the New York Times along the way.
“He had to have competition, and he had to win,”
says Reggie Dugard, another programmer.
But Ax had discovered trading to be as absorbing and
stimulating as any challenge he had encountered. He and
Straus programmed past price moves into their trading
model, hoping to predict the future.

“There’s something here,” Simons told Ax,
encouraging their new approach.
Searching for additional help, Simons asked Henry
Laufer, a well-regarded Stony Brook mathematician, to
spend one day a week helping out. Laufer and Ax had
complementary mathematical skills—Ax was a number
theorist, while Laufer explored functions of complex
numbers—suggesting a partnership might work. They
had distinct personalities, though. Taking over Lenny
Baum’s old office, Laufer sometimes brought his infant
into the office in a car seat, as Ax looked on askance.
Laufer created computer simulations to test whether
certain strategies should be added to their trading model.
The strategies were often based on the idea that prices
tend to revert after an initial move higher or lower.
Laufer would buy futures contracts if they opened at
unusually low prices compared with their previous
closing price, and sell if prices began the day much
higher than their previous close. Simons made his own
improvements to the evolving system, while insisting
that the team work together and share credit. Ax
sometimes had difficulty with the request, stressing out
over recognition and compensation.
“Henry is overstating his role,” Ax complained to
Simons one day.
“Don’t worry about it. I’ll treat you both equally.”
Simons’s response did little to appease Ax. For the
next six months, he refused to speak to Laufer, though
Laufer was so caught up in his work he barely noticed.
Around the office, Ax pushed conspiracy theories,
especially those involving the Kennedy assassination. He
also demanded that staffers refer to him as “Dr. Ax,” out
of respect for his PhD. (They refused.) Once, Ax asked
Penny Alberghine to tell a driver in an adjoining parking
lot to move his car because the sun glare was bothering

him. (Alberghine pretended she couldn’t find the car’s
owner.)
“He had no personal self-confidence and always took
things the wrong way,” Alberghine says. “I would pray
that I wouldn’t upset him or aggravate him.”
Ax and his team were making money, but there were
few hints their efforts would lead to anything special. It
wasn’t even clear Simons would keep the trading effort
going. When one employee received a job offer from
Grumman, Straus supported his decision to leave. The
defense contractor was a stable company—it even offered
a signing bonus of a free turkey. Leaving seemed like a
no-brainer.

=
In 1985, Ax surprised Simons with the news that he was
moving. Ax wanted to be in a warmer climate so he could
sail, surf, and play racquetball year-round. Straus also
wanted to flee the cold of the Northeast. Given little
choice, Simons agreed to let them move the trading
business to the West Coast.
Settling in Huntington Beach, California, thirtyseven miles from Los Angeles, Ax and Straus established
a new company called Axcom Limited. Simons received
25 percent of the new entity’s profits, while agreeing to
provide trading help and communicate with the new
firm’s clients. Ax and Straus would manage the
investments and split the remaining 75 percent
ownership. Laufer, who had no desire to move west,
returned to teach at Stony Brook, though he continued to
trade with Simons in his spare time.
Ax had another impetus for his move that he didn’t
share with Simons: He was dealing with enduring
sadness from his divorce, which he continued to blame
on his ex-wife. Once he left New York, Ax abandoned his
children, much as his own father had vanished from his

life years earlier. Ax wouldn’t speak to his boys again for
more than fifteen years.

=
The Huntington Beach office, located on the top floor of
a two-story office park owned by a subsidiary of oil giant
Chevron, was about the last place one would expect to
find a cutting-edge trading firm. Oil wells pumped away
in the parking lot, and the smell of crude oil permeated
the entire neighborhood. The building didn’t have an
elevator, so Straus and a crew of workers used a stair
crawler to get a hulking VAX-11/750, with 300
megabytes of disk storage, into the office. An immense
Gould superminicomputer, which had 900 megabytes of
storage and was the size of a large refrigerator, had to be
moved off a truck onto a forklift, which deposited it in
the office via a second-floor balcony.
By 1986, Axcom was trading twenty-one different
futures contracts, including the British pound, Swiss
franc, deutsch mark, Eurodollars, and commodities
including wheat, corn, and sugar. Mathematical formulas
developed by Ax and Straus generated most of the firm’s
moves, though a few decisions were based on Ax’s
judgment calls. Before the beginning of trading each day,
and just before the end of trading in the late afternoon, a
computer program would send an electronic message to
Greg Olsen, their broker at an outside firm, with an order
and some simple conditions. One example: “If wheat
opens above $4.25, sell 36 contracts.”
Olsen would buy and sell futures contracts the oldfashioned way: calling floor brokers at various
commodity and bond exchanges. Sometimes the results
of this partially automated system were impressive;
often, they left the team frustrated. One big problem:
Neither Simons nor the team in the Huntington Beach
office were unearthing new ways to make money or

improve their existing strategies, some of which their
rivals had caught on to. Simons considered the possible
influence of sunspots and lunar phases on trading, but
few reliable patterns resulted. Straus had a cousin who
worked at AccuWeather, the weather forecasting
company, so he made a deal to review Brazilian weather
history to see if it could predict coffee prices, another
effort that proved a waste of time. Data on public
sentiment and the holdings of fellow futures traders also
yielded few dependable sequences.
Ax spent time searching for fresh algorithms, but he
was also playing a lot of racquetball, learning how to
windsurf, and generally attending to an emerging midlife
crisis. With his broad shoulders, muscular build, and
wavy brown hair, Ax had the look of a chilled-out surfer,
but he was anything but relaxed, even in California.
Ax began staging intense weight-loss competitions
and became determined to trounce his officemates.
Once, just before the initial weigh-in, Ax packed on
several pounds gorging on melon, calculating that he’d
quickly shed the new weight, since melon is laden with
water. Another time, Ax furiously biked to work in the
sun, hoping to lose weight, arriving so drenched in
perspiration that he placed his underwear in an office
microwave to dry; minutes later, the microwave burst
into flames as a staffer ran for a fire extinguisher.
Several times a year, Simons flew to California to
discuss potential trading approaches, but his visits
produced more misery than breakthroughs. Now that
they lived in California, some of the staff embraced
health-conscious lifestyles. Simons was still chainsmoking three packs of Merits a day.
“No one wanted to be with him as he smoked in the
office,” says an employee at the time, “so we’d go out for
lunch and try to get him to work outside as long as we
could.”

When lunch was over, Simons would suggest they
return to the office, but the team so dreaded being
cooped up with his smoke that they’d manufacture
excuses to stay away.
“You know what, Jim, it’s nice out here,” a colleague
told Simons after one of their lunches.
“Yeah, let’s just stay and work outside,” another
Axcom member chimed in.
Simons agreed, oblivious to the true reason staffers
were dragging their feet about heading back inside.
Eventually, Ax decided they needed to trade in a
more sophisticated way. They hadn’t tried using morecomplex math to build trading formulas, partly because
the computing power didn’t seem sufficient. Now Ax
thought it might be time to give it a shot.
Ax had long believed financial markets shared
characteristics with Markov chains, those sequences of
events in which the next event is only dependent on the
current state. In a Markov chain, each step along the way
is impossible to predict with certainty, but future steps
can be predicted with some degree of accuracy if one
relies on a capable model. When Simons and Baum
developed their hypothetical trading model at the IDA, a
decade prior, they, too, had described the market as a
Markov-like process.
To improve their predictive models, Ax concluded it
was time to bring in someone with experience developing
stochastic equations, the broader family of equations to
which Markov chains belong. Stochastic equations model
dynamic processes that evolve over time and can involve
a high level of uncertainty. Straus had recently read
academic literature suggesting that trading models based
on stochastic equations could be valuable tools. He
agreed that Axcom needed to recruit additional
mathematical firepower.

A bit later, René Carmona, a professor at nearby
University of California, Irvine, got a call from a friend.
“There’s a group of mathematicians doing stochastic
differential equations who are looking for help,” the
friend said. “How well do you know that stuff?”
A forty-one-year-old native of France who later
became a professor at Princeton University, Carmona
didn’t know much about markets or investing, but
stochastic differential equations were his specialty. These
equations can make predictions using data that appears
random; weather-forecasting models, for example, use
stochastic equations to generate reasonably accurate
estimates. Members of Axcom’s team viewed investing
through a math prism and understood financial markets
to be complicated and evolving, with behavior that is
difficult to predict, at least over long stretches—just like a
stochastic process.
It’s easy to see why they saw similarities between
stochastic processes and investing. For one thing,
Simons, Ax, and Straus didn’t believe the market was
truly a “random walk,” or entirely unpredictable, as some
academics and others argued. Though it clearly had
elements of randomness, much like the weather,
mathematicians like Simons and Ax would argue that a
probability distribution could capture futures prices as
well as any other stochastic process. That’s why Ax
thought employing such a mathematical representation
could be helpful to their trading models. Perhaps by
hiring Carmona, they could develop a model that would
produce a range of likely outcomes for their investments,
helping to improve their performance.
Carmona was eager to lend a hand—he was
consulting for a local aerospace company at the time and
liked the idea of picking up extra cash working for
Axcom a few days a week. The challenge of improving the
firm’s trading results also intrigued him.

“The goal was to invent a mathematical model and
use it as a framework to infer some consequences and
conclusions,” Carmona says. “The name of the game is
not to always be right, but to be right often enough.”
Carmona wasn’t certain the approach would work, or
even that it was much better than the less-quantitative
investment strategies embraced by most others at the
time.
“If I had a better understanding of psychology or
traders on the floor of the exchange, maybe we would do
that,” Carmona says.
Early on, Carmona used Straus’s data to try to
improve Axcom’s existing mathematical models, but his
work didn’t lead to many useful advances. Although
Carmona’s models were more sophisticated than those
Axcom previously employed, they didn’t seem to work
much better. Later, Renaissance would fully embrace
stochastic differential equations for risk management
and options pricing, but, for now, they couldn’t find a
way to profit from these techniques, frustrating
Carmona.

=
By 1987, Carmona was plagued by guilt. His pay came
from a portion of Ax’s personal bonus, yet Carmona was
contributing next to nothing to the company. He decided
to spend that summer working full-time at Axcom,
hoping more time devoted to the models would lead to
greater success. Carmona made little headway, further
aggravating him. Ax and Straus didn’t seem to mind, but
Carmona felt awful.
“I was taking money from them and nothing was
really working,” he says.
One day, Carmona had an idea. Axcom had been
employing various approaches to using their pricing data

to trade, including relying on breakout signals. They also
used simple linear regressions, a basic forecasting tool
relied upon by many investors that analyzes the
relationships between two sets of data or variables under
the assumption those relationships will remain linear.
Plot crude-oil prices on the x-axis and the price of
gasoline on the y-axis, place a straight regression line
through the points on the graph, extend that line, and
you usually can do a pretty good job predicting prices at
the pump for a given level of oil price.
Market prices are sometimes all over the place,
though. A model dependent on running simple linear
regressions through data points generally does a poor job
predicting future prices in complex, volatile markets
marked by freak snowstorms, panic selling, and
turbulent geopolitical events, all of which can play havoc
with commodity and other prices. At the same time,
Straus had collected dozens of data sets with closing
prices of commodities from various historical periods.
Carmona decided they needed regressions that might
capture nonlinear relationships in market data.
He suggested a different approach. Carmona’s idea
was to have computers search for relationships in the
data Straus had amassed. Perhaps they could find
instances in the remote past of similar trading
environments, then they could examine how prices
reacted. By identifying comparable trading situations
and tracking what subsequently happened to prices, they
could develop a sophisticated and accurate forecasting
model capable of detecting hidden patterns.
For this approach to work, Axcom needed a lot of
data, even more than Straus and the others had
collected. To solve the problem, Straus began to model
data rather than just collect it. In other words, to deal
with gaps in the historical data, he used computer
models to make educated guesses as to what was
missing. They didn’t have extensive cotton pricing data

from the 1940s, for example, but maybe creating the
data would suffice. Just as one can infer what a missing
jigsaw puzzle piece might look like by observing pieces
already in place, the Axcom team made deductions about
the missing information and inputted it into its database.
Carmona suggested letting the model run the show
by digesting all the various pieces of data and spitting out
buy-and-sell decisions. In a sense, he was proposing an
early machine-learning system. The model would
generate predictions for various commodity prices based
on complex patterns, clusters, and correlations that
Carmona and the others didn’t understand themselves
and couldn’t detect with the naked eye.
Elsewhere, statisticians were using similar
approaches—called kernel methods—to analyze patterns
in data sets. Back on Long Island, Henry Laufer was
working on similar machine-learning tactics in his own
research and was set to share it with Simons and others.
Carmona wasn’t aware of this work. He was simply
proposing using sophisticated algorithms to give Ax and
Straus the framework to identify patterns in current
prices that seemed similar to those in the past.
“You should use this,” Carmona urged his colleagues.
When they shared the approach with Simons, he
blanched. The linear equations they had been relying on
generated trade ideas and an allocation of capital that
Simons could understand. By contrast, it wasn’t clear
why Carmona’s program produced its results. His
method wasn’t based on a model Simons and his
colleagues could reduce to a set of standard equations,
and that bothered him. Carmona’s results came from
running a program for hours, letting computers dig
through patterns and then generate trades. To Simons, it
just didn’t feel right.
“I can’t get comfortable with what this is telling me,”
Simons told the team one day. “I don’t understand why

[the program is saying to buy and not sell].”
Later, Simons became more exasperated.
“It’s a black box!” he said with frustration.
Carmona agreed with Simons’s assessment, but he
persisted.
“Just follow the data, Jim,” he said. “It’s not me, it’s
the data.”
Ax, who was developing a friendship with Carmona,
became a believer in the approach, defending it to
Simons.
“It works, Jim,” Ax said to Simons. “And it makes
rational sense . . . humans can’t forecast prices.”
Let computers do it, Ax urged. It was exactly what
Simons originally had hoped to do. Yet, Simons still
wasn’t convinced of the radical approach. In his head,
Simons was all-in on the concept of relying on models.
His heart wasn’t quite there yet, it appeared.
“Jim liked to figure out what the model was doing,”
Straus recalls. “He wasn’t super fond of the kernel.”
Over time, Straus and his colleagues created and
discovered additional historical pricing data, helping Ax
develop new predictive models relying on Carmona’s
suggestions. Some of the weekly stock-trading data
they’d later find went back as far as the 1800s, reliable
information almost no one else had access to. At the
time, the team couldn’t do much with the data, but the
ability to search history to see how markets reacted to
unusual events would later help Simons’s team build
models to profit from market collapses and other
unexpected events, helping the firm trounce markets
during those periods.
When the Axcom team started testing the approach,
they quickly began to see improved results. The firm
began incorporating higher dimensional kernel

regression approaches, which seemed to work best for
trending models, or those predicting how long certain
investments would keep moving in a trend.
Simons was convinced they could do even better.
Carmona’s ideas helped, but they weren’t enough.
Simons called and visited, hoping to improve Axcom’s
performance, but he mostly served as the pool operator,
finding wealthy investors for the fund and keeping them
happy, while attending to the various technology
investments that made up about half of the $100 million
assets now held by the firm.
Seeking even more mathematical firepower, Simons
arranged for a well-respected academic to consult with
the firm. That move would lay the groundwork for a
historic breakthrough.

CHAPTER FIVE
I strongly believe, for all babies and a
significant number of grownups, curiosity is
a bigger motivator than money.
Elwyn Berlekamp

F might help revolutionize the world of finance would

or much of his life, the suggestion that Elwyn Berlekamp

have sounded like someone’s idea of a bad joke.
Growing up in Fort Thomas, Kentucky, on the
southern bank of the Ohio River, Berlekamp devoted
himself to church life, math games, and staying as far
away from athletics as possible. Berlekamp’s father was a
minister in the Evangelical and Reformed Church, now
known as the United Church of Christ, one of the largest
and most liberal Protestant denominations in the
country. Waldo Berlekamp was a gentle and
compassionate ecumenical leader who arranged joint
services with different Protestant churches and Catholic
congregations, gaining a loyal following for his
captivating sermons and engaging personality. When the
family moved, 450 congregants came to a going-away
party. They presented Waldo with a new DeSoto
automobile, a sign of their affection and appreciation.
As a boy in Fort Thomas, a 10,000-person Cincinnati
suburb proud of its abolitionist history, Elwyn developed
a strong anti-Southern bias and the conviction to pursue
his interests, no matter how unpopular. While others in
grade school were tackling, throwing, and wrestling on
the playground, Berlekamp, serious and slim, was inside
a classroom competing in a different way. Berlekamp
and a few friends liked to grab pencils and paper to

create boards of dots. They’d take turns adding lines,
linking dots, and closing squares, playing dots and boxes,
a century-old strategy game popular at the time in the
Midwest. Some viewed the game as simple child’s play,
but dots and boxes has surprising complexity and
mathematical underpinnings, something Berlekamp
came to appreciate later in life.
“It was an early education in game theory,”
Berlekamp says.
By the time Berlekamp entered Fort Thomas
Highlands High School, in 1954, he was a wiry five-footten-inch young man with a good idea of what he enjoyed
inside and outside the classroom. In school, it was
mostly math and science. Detecting an intelligence that
stood out from others, his classmates elected Berlekamp
class president. He had curiosity about other subjects,
too, though a passion for literature was mostly
extinguished by a teacher who insisted on spending half
the semester analyzing the novel Gone With the Wind.
Sports didn’t register anywhere on Berlekamp’s list
of interests, yet he felt pressure to participate.
“Nerds were unpopular, and school spirit was greatly
emphasized,” he says, “so I went with the flow and
decided to join a team.”
Berlekamp did the math and realized his best odds
were in swimming.
“The swim team didn’t have as many people as they
needed, so I at least knew I wouldn’t be cut.”
Each night, the boys swam in the nude in a pool at
the local YMCA filled with so much chlorine that it took
hours to wash it all off, a likely reason the team was so
unpopular. It also could have been the coach, who
screamed at the boys throughout the practice.
Berlekamp, the slowest and weakest swimmer, usually
bore the brunt of the abuse.

“Come on, Berlekamp!” the coach bellowed. “Get the
lead out of your pants!”
The idiom struck the young man as especially inane
since he was naked at the time.
Berlekamp was both slow and out of shape. In the
few meets where he managed to finish second and
capture a medal, only one other competitor had
registered for his races.
There was a mix-up at a state competition in 1957,
and Berlekamp was forced to swim in a relay race against
a group of much stronger swimmers. Luckily, his
teammates handed Berlekamp a huge lead that even he
couldn’t blow. His team took gold, Berlekamp’s one
shining athletic moment, teaching him a valuable life
lesson.
“Try to get on a great team,” he says.
(Decades later, the relay team’s anchor, Jack
Wadsworth Jr., then working as an investment banker,
led the initial public offering for an upstart company
called Apple Computer.)
When applying to college, Berlekamp had two
requirements: world-class academics and a weak sports
program. He had decided that sports was
overemphasized in society, and he was no longer going to
pretend to care.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology became
an obvious choice. “When I heard MIT didn’t have a
football team, I knew it was the school for me,” he says.
Moving to Cambridge, Massachusetts, Berlekamp
dabbled in physics, economics, computers, and
chemistry. As a freshman, he was selected to participate
in an advanced calculus class taught by John Nash, the
game theorist and mathematician who later would be
immortalized in Sylvia Nasar’s book A Beautiful Mind.
One day, in early 1959, Nash was lecturing at the

chalkboard when a student raised his hand to ask a
question. Nash turned to him and stared intensely. After
several minutes of awkward silence, Nash pointed a
finger at the student, berating him for having the
temerity to interrupt his lecture.
“He looked mad,” Berlekamp recalls.
It was one of the first public hints of Nash’s
developing mental illness. A few weeks later, Nash
resigned from MIT and was admitted to a local hospital
for treatment of schizophrenia.
Berlekamp had little trouble navigating most of his
classes. One year, he received eight As in a single
semester and a 4.9 grade point average (on a 5.0 scale),
weighed down by a single C in humanities. After winning
a prestigious mathematics competition in his senior year
to become a Putnam Fellow, Berlekamp began a PhD
program at MIT. He focused on electrical engineering,
studying with Peter Elias and Claude Shannon. Elias and
Shannon were pioneers of information theory, the
groundbreaking approach to quantifying, encoding, and
transmitting telephone signals, text, pictures, and other
kinds of information that would provide the
underpinnings for computers, the internet, and all digital
media.
One afternoon, Shannon passed Berlekamp in the
school’s hallway. The thin, five-foot-ten-inch professor
was a notorious introvert, so Berlekamp had to think fast
to try to grab his attention.
“I’m going to the library to check out one of your
papers,” Berlekamp blurted.
Shannon grimaced.
“Don’t do that—you learn more if you try to work it
out yourself,” Shannon insisted.
He pulled Berlekamp aside, as if to share a secret.

“It’s not a good time to invest in the market,”
Shannon said.
Shannon hadn’t told many others, but he had begun
building mathematical formulas to try to beat the stock
market. At that point, his formulas were flashing signs of
caution. Berlekamp tried hard not to laugh; he had
virtually nothing in the bank, so Shannon’s warnings
meant nothing to him. Besides, Berlekamp held a
dismissive view of finance.
“My impression was that it was a game in which rich
people play around with each other, and it doesn’t do the
world much good,” Berlekamp says. “It still is my
impression.”
The fact that someone Berlekamp admired was
trading stocks came as something of a shock to the young
man.
“That was really news,” he says.
During the summers of 1960 and 1962, Berlekamp
spent time as a research assistant at the prestigious Bell
Laboratories research center in Murray Hill, New Jersey.
There, Berlekamp worked for John Larry Kelly Jr., a
handsome physicist with a thick Texan drawl and a range
of interests and habits, many of which Berlekamp didn’t
initially appreciate. Kelly, who had spent four years as a
pilot in the US Navy during World War II, mounted a
huge rifle on his living room wall, smoked six packs of
cigarettes a day, and was passionate about professional
and college football, even introducing a novel betting
system to predict game scores.
When Kelly became frustrated with his work, he used
language that his young assistant was unaccustomed to
hearing.
“Motherfucking integrals,” Kelly cried out one day,
startling Berlekamp.

Despite the sometimes-crude exterior, Kelly was the
most brilliant scientist Berlekamp had ever met.
“To my shock, all his math was right,” Berlekamp
says. “I used to think of Southerners as dumb—Kelly
changed my view.”
Several years earlier, Kelly had published a paper
describing a system he’d developed to analyze
information transmitted over networks, a strategy that
also worked for making various kinds of wagers. To
illustrate his ideas, Kelly developed a method he had
devised to profit at the racetrack. Kelly’s system
proposed ideal bets if one somehow obtained enough
information to disregard the posted odds and could
instead rely on a more accurate set of probabilities—the
“true odds” for each race.
Kelly’s formula had grown out of Shannon’s earlier
work on information theory. Spending evenings at
Kelly’s home playing bridge and discussing science,
math, and more, Berlekamp came to see the similarities
between betting on horses and investing in stocks, given
that chance plays a huge role in both. They also
discussed how accurate information and properly sized
wagers can provide one with an advantage.
Kelly’s work underscored the importance of sizing
one’s bets, a lesson Berlekamp would draw on later in
life.
“I had zero interest in finance, but here was Kelly
doing all this portfolio theory,” Berlekamp says.
Slowly, Berlekamp began to appreciate the
intellectual challenges—and financial rewards—
stemming from finance.

=
In 1964, Berlekamp found himself in a deep rut. A young
woman he had been dating broke up with him, and he

was wallowing in self-pity. When the University of
California, Berkeley, asked if he’d fly to the West Coast to
interview for a teaching job, Berlekamp jumped at the
opportunity.
“It was snowing and freezing, and I needed a break,”
he says.
Berlekamp eventually accepted the job and
completed his doctoral thesis at Berkeley, becoming an
assistant professor in electrical engineering. One day,
while juggling in his apartment, Berlekamp heard a
rapping from the floor below. The noise he was making
was disturbing the two women who lived below him.
Berlekamp’s apology led to an introduction to a student
from England named Jennifer Wilson, whom he married
in 1966.1
Berlekamp became an expert in decoding digital
information, helping NASA decipher images coming
back from satellites exploring Mars, Venus, and other
parts of the solar system. Employing principles he had
developed studying puzzles and games, like dots and
boxes, Berlekamp cofounded a branch of mathematics
called combinatorial game theory and wrote a book
called Algebraic Coding Theory, a classic in the field. He
also constructed an algorithm, appropriately named
Berlekamp’s algorithm, for the factorization of
polynomials over finite fields, which became a crucial
tool in cryptography and other fields.
Berlekamp wasn’t nearly as capable at navigating
campus politics, as he soon found himself caught in a
raging turf war between departments in Berkeley’s
College of Letters and Science.
“I got criticized for having lunch with the wrong
people,” he recalls.
Berlekamp came to realize that much of human
interaction is colored by shades of gray that he
sometimes found difficult to discern. Mathematics, by

contrast, elicits objective, unbiased answers, results he
found calming and reassuring.
“Truth in life is broad and nuanced; you can make all
kinds of arguments, such as whether a president or
person is fantastic or awful,” he says. “That’s why I love
math problems—they have clear answers.”
By the late 1960s, Berlekamp’s work on coding
theory had gained the attention of the Institute for
Defense Analyses, the nonprofit corporation that also
employed Simons. Berlekamp began doing classified
work for the IDA in 1968, spending years on various
projects in Berkeley and in Princeton. During that time, a
colleague introduced him to Simons, but the two didn’t
hit it off, despite sharing a love of math and time spent at
MIT, Berkeley, and the IDA.
“His mathematics were different from mine,”
Berlekamp says. “And Jim had an insatiable urge to do
finance and make money. He likes action. . . . He was
always playing poker and fussing around with the
markets. I’ve always viewed poker as a digression, of no
more interest to me than baseball or football—which is to
say hardly any.”
Berlekamp returned to Berkeley as a professor of
electrical engineering and mathematics around the same
time Simons built his Stony Brook department. In 1973,
when Berlekamp became part owner of a cryptography
company, he thought Simons might want a stake. Simons
couldn’t afford the $4 million investment, but he served
on the company’s board of directors. Berlekamp noticed
Simons was a good listener at board meetings and made
sensible recommendations, though he often interrupted
the gatherings to take smoking breaks.
In 1985, Eastman Kodak acquired a company
Berlekamp had founded that worked with block codes for
space and satellite communications. The resulting

windfall of several million dollars brought new
challenges to his marriage.
“My wife wanted a bigger house; I wanted to travel,”
he says.
Determined to protect his newfound wealth,
Berlekamp bought top-rated municipal bonds, but a
rumor in the spring of 1986 that Congress might remove
the tax-free status of those investments crushed their
value. Congress never acted, but the experience taught
Berlekamp that investors sometimes act irrationally. He
considered investing his money in stocks, but a former
college roommate warned him that corporate executives
“lie to shareholders,” rendering most shares dicey
prospects.
“You should look at commodities,” the college friend
said.
Berlekamp knew commodities trading entailed
complicated futures contracts, so he called Simons, the
one person he knew who had some understanding of the
area, asking for advice.
Simons seemed thrilled to receive the phone call.
“I have just the opportunity for you,” he said.
Simons invited Berlekamp to fly to Huntington
Beach a couple times a month to learn to trade for
himself and see if his expertise in statistical information
theory might be useful to Axcom.
“You really should go down and talk to Jim Ax,”
Simons told Berlekamp. “He could benefit from someone
like you.”
Earlier in life, Berlekamp had been contemptuous of
the trading business; now he was intrigued by the idea of
a new challenge. He flew to the Huntington Beach office
in 1988, with eager anticipation. Before Berlekamp could
settle into his desk, however, Ax approached with a look
of annoyance on his face.

“If Simons wants you to work for us, he’ll have to pay
for you,” Ax told Berlekamp by way of introduction. “I
know I’m not.”
Berlekamp was taken aback. Ax wanted him out of
the office right away. Berlekamp had flown all the way
from Berkeley, and he didn’t want to turn around and go
home so quickly. He decided to stick around a bit, but to
stay out of Ax’s way, much as George Costanza returned
to work after getting fired in a classic episode of the
television show Seinfeld.
Soon, Berlekamp learned that Ax and Simons were in
the midst of a bitter, long-running feud centered on who
should pay Axcom’s mounting expenses, a battle Simons
had neglected to mention to Berlekamp.
For all the brainpower the team was employing, and
the help they were receiving from Carmona and others,
Axcom’s model usually focused on two simple and
commonplace trading strategies. Sometimes, it chased
prices, or bought various commodities that were moving
higher or lower on the assumption that the trend would
continue. Other times, the model wagered that a price
move was petering out and would reverse, a reversion
strategy.
Ax had access to more extensive pricing information
than his rivals, thanks to Straus’s growing collection of
clean, historic data. Since price movements often
resembled those of the past, that data enabled the firm to
more accurately determine when trends were likely to
continue and when they were ebbing. Computing power
had improved and become cheaper, allowing the team to
produce more sophisticated trading models, including
Carmona’s kernel methods—the early, machine-learning
strategy that had made Simons so uncomfortable. With
those advantages, Axcom averaged annual gains of about
20 percent, topping most rivals.

Yet Simons kept asking why returns weren’t better.
Adding to the tension, their rivals were multiplying. A
veteran analyst at Merrill Lynch named John Murphy
had published a book called Technical Analysis of the
Financial Markets, explaining, in simple terms, how to
track and trade price trends.
Buying investments as they became more expensive
and selling them as they fell in value was at odds with
leading academic theory, which recommended buying
when prices cheapened and taking money off the table
when prices richened. Warren Buffett and other bigname investors embraced that value style of investing.
Still, some aggressive traders, including hedge-fund
manager Paul Tudor Jones, had adopted trend following
strategies similar to those Simons’s team relied on.
Simons needed new approaches to stay a step ahead of
the pack.
Berlekamp began sharing his suggestions. He told Ax
that Axcom’s trading models didn’t seem to size trades
properly. They should buy and sell larger amounts when
their model suggested a better chance of making money,
Berlekamp argued, precepts he had learned from Kelly.
“We ought to be loading up here,” Berlekamp said one
day.
Ax didn’t seem impressed.
“We’ll get to that,” Ax replied, halfheartedly.
Berlekamp discovered other problems with Axcom’s
operations. The firm traded gold, silver, copper, and
other metals, as well as hogs and other meats, and grains
and other commodities. But their buy-and-sell orders
were still placed through emailed instructions to their
broker, Greg Olsen, at the open and close of trading each
day, and Axcom often held on to investments for weeks
or even months at a time.
That’s a dangerous approach, Berlekamp argued,
because markets can be volatile. Infrequent trading

precluded the firm from jumping on new opportunities
as they arose and led to losses during extended
downturns. Berlekamp urged Ax to look for smaller,
short-term opportunities—get in and get out. Ax brushed
him off again, this time citing the cost of doing rapid
trading. Besides, Straus’s intraday price data was riddled
with inaccuracies—he hadn’t fully “cleaned” it yet—so
they couldn’t create a reliable model for short-term
trades.
Ax consented to giving Berlekamp a few research
assignments, but each time Berlekamp visited, he
realized Ax had mostly ignored his recommendations—
calling them mere “tinkering”—or they had been poorly
implemented. It hadn’t been Ax’s idea for Berlekamp to
pop in to share his opinions, and he wasn’t going to be
bothered with the theories and suggestions of a professor
just beginning to understand the trading game.
Ax didn’t seem to need much help. The previous
year, 1987, Axcom had scored double-digit returns,
sidestepping a crash in October that sent the Dow Jones
Industrial Average plummeting 22.6 percent in a day.
Ignoring the trading model, Ax had presciently
purchased Eurodollar futures, which soared as stocks
plummeted, helping Axcom offset other losses.
Word was beginning to get out that Simons had math
wizards attempting a new strategy, and a few individuals
showed interest in investing in Axcom, including Edward
Thorp, the pioneering quantitative trader. Thorp made
an appointment to meet Simons in New York but
canceled it after doing some due diligence. It wasn’t
Simons’s strategies that most concerned him.
“I learned Simons was a chain-smoker and going to
their offices was like walking into a giant ashtray,” said
Thorp, who had moved to Newport Beach, California.
Clients had other issues with Axcom. Some didn’t
have faith in Simons’s venture-capital adventures and

didn’t want a fund with those kinds of investments. To
keep those investors in the fold, Simons shut down
Limroy in March 1988, selling off the venture
investments to launch, together with Ax, an offshore
hedge fund focused solely on trading. They named their
hedge fund Medallion, in honor of the prestigious math
awards each had received.
Within six months, Medallion was suffering. Some of
the losses could be traced to a shift in Ax’s focus.

=
After moving to California, Ax had rented a quiet home
with a boat slip in nearby Huntington Harbor, five miles
down Pacific Coast Highway from the office. Soon, Ax
was searching for a more isolated spot, eventually
renting a seaside estate in Malibu.
Ax never truly enjoyed the company of others,
especially his co-workers. Now he became even more
detached from those around him, managing nearly a
dozen employees in the Huntington office remotely. He
went into the office just once a week. Sometimes,
Berlekamp flew in for a meeting only to discover Ax
hadn’t budged from Malibu. After Ax married an
accountant named Frances, he became even less inclined
to travel to meet with the team. Sometimes he called to
make requests entirely unrelated to their algorithms and
predictive models.
“Okay, so what kind of cereal do you want me to
bring?” an employee was overheard saying to Ax on the
phone one day.
As Ax became more disengaged, Axcom’s results
deteriorated.
“The research wasn’t as aggressive,” Carmona says.
“When the boss isn’t present, the dynamics aren’t the
same.”

Berlekamp puts it this way: “Ax was a competent
mathematician but an incompetent research manager.”
Looking for still more seclusion, Ax purchased a
spectacular home on a cliff in Pacific Palisades atop a hill
overlooking the Santa Monica Mountains. Carmona
drove there once a week to bring Ax food, books, and
other necessities. They’d engage in grueling paddle
tennis matches as Carmona patiently listened to Ax’s
latest conspiracy theories. Colleagues came to see Ax as
something of a hermit, theorizing that he kept choosing
homes near the coast so he wouldn’t have to deal with
anyone on at least one side of his house. After a staffer
agreed to come install a salt lick in Ax’s yard, so he could
attract deer and other animals, Ax spent long stretches
staring at the scene from a window.
Ax relied on his instincts for a portion of the
portfolio, edging away from trading based on the
sophisticated models he and Straus had developed, much
as Baum had drifted toward traditional trading years
earlier and Simons was initially uncomfortable with
Carmona’s “kernels.” It seemed quantitative investing
didn’t come naturally, even to math professors. Ax
figured out that West Coast copies of the New York
Times were printed in the city of Torrance, about forty
miles away, and arranged for the next day’s paper to be
delivered to his home just after midnight. Ax proceeded
to make trades in overnight, international markets based
on comments from government officials and others he
had read in the paper, hoping to get a step on
competitors. He also installed enormous television
screens throughout his home to monitor the news and
communicate with colleagues through a video
connection he had established.
“He became infatuated with technology,” Berlekamp
says.
Ax drove a white Jaguar, played a lot of racquetball,
and spent time on his mountain bike in the nearby hills,

at one point falling headfirst, prompting emergency
brain surgery. The firm’s results remained strong during
the first half of 1988, but then losses hit. Ax was
confident a rebound was imminent, but Simons grew
concerned. Soon, he and Ax were squabbling once again.
Ax wanted to upgrade the firm’s computers, so the
trading system could run faster, but there was no way he
was going to pay for the improvements. Simons also
resisted writing any checks. As tensions grew, Ax
complained that Simons wasn’t meeting his share of the
responsibilities.
“Let Simons pay for everything,” Ax told a colleague
when a bill arrived.
By the spring of 1989, Ax had developed a healthy
respect for Berlekamp, a fellow world-class
mathematician who shared his competitive streak. Ax
still wasn’t implementing Berlekamp’s trading
suggestions, mind you, but he realized he was in a bind,
and there were few others around to listen to his
complaints about Simons.
“I’m doing all the trading, and he’s just dealing with
the investors,” Ax told Berlekamp, who tried to be
sympathetic.
One day, when Berlekamp visited, Ax looked somber.
Their fund had been losing money for months and was
now down nearly 30 percent from the middle of the
previous year, a staggering blow. Axcom’s soybeanfutures holdings had collapsed in value when an attempt
by an Italian conglomerate to corner the market came
undone, sending prices plummeting. Mounting
competition from other trend followers was also having
an effect.
Ax showed Berlekamp a letter he’d received from
Simons’s accountant, Mark Silber, ordering Axcom to
halt all trading that was based on the firm’s struggling,
longer-term predictive signals until Ax and his team

produced a plan to revamp and improve its trading
operations. Simons would only allow Axcom to do shortterm trading, a style that represented just 10 percent of
its activity.
Ax was furious. He was in charge of trading;
Simons’s job was handling their investors.
“How can he stop me from trading?” Ax said, his
voice rising. “He can’t close me down!”
Ax remained certain the fund’s performance would
rebound. Trending strategies require an investor to live
through tough periods, when trends ebb or they can’t be
identified, because new ones are often around the bend.
Simons’s trading halt had violated their partnership
agreement. Ax was going to sue Simons.
“He’s been bossing me around too long!” Ax
bellowed.
Berlekamp tried to calm Ax down. A lawsuit wasn’t
the brightest idea, Berlekamp said. It would be costly,
take forever, and ultimately might not succeed. Besides,
Simons had a good argument: Technically, Axcom was
trading for a general partnership controlled by Simons,
so he had the legal right to determine the firm’s future.
Ax didn’t realize it, but Simons was dealing with his
own pressures. Old friends and investors were calling,
worried about the steep losses. Some couldn’t take the
pain and withdrew their cash. When Simons dealt with
Straus and others at the office, he was curt. They all
could see the losses mounting, and the mood within the
firm soured.
Simons decided Ax’s strategies were much too
simple. He told Ax the only way he could prevent clients
from bailing and keep the firm alive was to curtail their
long-term trades, which were causing all their losses,
while reassuring investors that they’d develop new and
improved tactics.

Ax didn’t want to hear it. He set out for Huntington
Beach to elicit the support of his colleagues. He had little
luck. Straus didn’t want to pick sides, he told Ax, and was
uncomfortable being in the middle of an escalating battle
jeopardizing both his firm and his career. Ax became
enraged.
“How can you be so disloyal!” he screamed at Straus.
Straus didn’t know how to respond.
“I sat there feeling stupid,” he says.
Simons had spent more than a decade backing
various traders and attempting a new approach to
investing. He hadn’t made much headway. Baum had
flamed out, Henry Laufer wasn’t around much, and now
his fund with Ax and Straus was down to $20 million
amid mounting losses. Simons was spending more time
on his various side businesses than he was on trading;
his heart didn’t seem to be in the investment business.
Straus and his colleagues became convinced Simons
might shutter the firm.
“It wasn’t clear Jim had any faith,” he says. “And it
wasn’t clear if we would survive or fold.”
Returning home at night, Straus and his wife spent
hours preparing for the worst, calculating their spending
habits and tallying their accumulated wealth as their two
young children played nearby in their den. They
discussed where they might move if Simons closed
Axcom and gave up trading.
Back in the office, the bickering between Simons and
Ax continued. Straus listened as Ax screamed over the
phone at Simons and Silber. It all became too much.
“I’m going on vacation,” Straus finally told Ax. “You
guys work this out.”

=

By the summer of 1989, Ax felt boxed in. He was using
second-tier lawyers who worked on contingency fees
while Simons employed top-flight New York attorneys. It
was becoming obvious that Simons would outlast him in
a legal fight.
One day, Berlekamp presented Ax with an idea.
“Why don’t I buy your stake in the firm?”
Privately, Berlekamp was beginning to think he
might be able to turn Axcom around. He was only
spending a day or two each month at the firm, and he
wondered how it might fare if he focused his full
attention on improving the trading system. No one had
figured out how to build a computer system to score
huge gains; maybe Berlekamp could be the one to help
do it.
“I was hooked on the intellectual exercise,”
Berlekamp says.
Ax decided he didn’t have a better option, so he
agreed to sell most of his Axcom shares to Berlekamp.
After the deal was completed, Berlekamp owned 40
percent of the firm, leaving Straus and Simons with 25
percent each, while Ax retained 10 percent.
Ax holed up in his home for months, speaking to his
wife and few others. Eventually, he began a slow and
remarkable transformation. Ax and his wife moved to
San Diego, where he finally learned to relax just a bit,
writing poetry and enrolling in screenwriting classes. He
even completed a science-fiction thriller called Bots.
Ax went online and read an academic paper about
quantum mechanics written by Simon Kochen and
decided to reconnect with his former colleague, who still
taught at Princeton. Soon, they were collaborating on
academic papers about mathematical aspects of
quantum mechanics.2

There remained an emptiness in Ax’s life. He tracked
down the whereabouts of his younger son, Brian. One
day, he picked up the phone to call Brian in his
dormitory room at Brown University in Providence,
Rhode Island. They hadn’t spoken in more than fifteen
years.
“Hi,” he began, tentatively. “This is James Ax.”
They spoke for hours that evening, the first of a
series of lengthy and intense conversations between Ax
and his two sons. Ax shared his regrets about how he had
abandoned his boys and acknowledged the damage his
anger had caused. The boys forgave Ax, eager to have
their father back in their lives. Over time, Ax and his
sons forged close relationships. In 2003, after Ax became
a grandfather, he and Barbara, his ex-wife, reunited and
established their own unlikely friendship.
Three years later, at the age of sixty-nine, Ax died of
colon cancer. On his tombstone, his sons engraved a
formula representing the Ax-Kochen theorem.

CHAPTER SIX
Scientists are human, often all too human.
When desire and data are in collision,
evidence sometimes loses out to emotion.
Brian Keating, cosmologist, Losing the Nobel Prize

E during the summer of 1989, just as the investment
lwyn Berlekamp took the reins of the Medallion fund

business was heating up. A decade earlier, financial
companies claimed about 10 percent of all US profits.
Now they were on their way to more than doubling that
figure in an era that became known for greed and selfindulgence, as captured by novels like Bright Lights, Big
City and songs like Madonna’s “Material Girl.”
The unquenchable thirst of traders, bankers, and
investors for market-moving financial news unavailable
to the general public—known as an information
advantage—helped fuel Wall Street’s gains. Tips about
imminent corporate-takeover offers, earnings, and new
products were coin of the realm in the twilight of the
Reagan era. Junk-bond king Michael Milken pocketed
over one billion dollars in compensation between 1983
and 1987 before securities violations related to an insider
trading investigation landed him in jail. Others joined
him, including investment banker Martin Siegel and
trader Ivan Boesky, who exchanged both takeover
information and briefcases packed with hundreds of
thousands of dollars in neat stacks of $100 bills.1 By
1989, Gordon Gekko, the protagonist in the movie Wall
Street, had come to define the business’s aggressive,
cocksure professionals, who regularly pushed for an
unfair edge.

Berlekamp was an anomaly in this testosteronedrenched period, an academic with little use for juicy
rumors or hot tips. He barely knew how various
companies earned their profits and had zero interest in
learning.
Approaching his forty-ninth birthday, Berlekamp
also bore little physical resemblance to the masters of the
universe reaping Wall Street’s mounting spoils.
Berlekamp had come to value physical fitness, embracing
a series of extreme and unsafe diets and grueling bicycle
rides. At one point, he lost so much weight that he looked
emaciated, worrying colleagues. Balding and
bespectacled, with a neat, salt-and-pepper beard,
Berlekamp rarely wore ties and stored as many as five
multicolored BIC pens in his front pocket.
Even among the computer nerds gaining some
prominence in corners of the business world, Berlekamp
stood out. When he traveled to a conference in Carmel,
California, in 1989, to study how machines could build
better predictive models, Berlekamp seemed the most
absentminded professor of them all.
“Elwyn was a little disheveled, his shirttail out and
wrinkled, and his eyes darting around when he was
thinking hard,” says Langdon Wheeler, who met
Berlekamp at the conference and later became his friend.
“But he was so smart, I saw past the quirks and wanted
to learn from him.”
Around the office at Axcom, Berlekamp favored
lengthy tangents and digressions, causing rounds of
hand-wringing among employees. Berlekamp once said
he liked to do 80 percent of the talking in a conversation;
those who knew him viewed the estimate as a bit
conservative. But Berlekamp’s reputation as a
mathematician earned him respect, and his confidence
that Medallion could improve its performance bred
optimism.

Berlekamp’s first plan of action was to move the firm
closer to his home in Berkeley, a decision Straus and his
wife came to support. In September 1989, Straus leased
offices on the ninth floor of the historic, twelve-story
Wells Fargo Building, the city’s first high-rise, a short
walk from the campus of UC Berkeley. The office’s
existing hardwire lines couldn’t deliver accurate prices at
a fast-enough speed, so a staffer arranged to use a
satellite receiver atop the Tribune Tower in nearby
Oakland to transmit up-to-the-minute futures prices. A
month later, the San Francisco area was rocked by the
Loma Prieta earthquake, which killed sixty-three people.
Axcom’s new office didn’t suffer serious damage, but
shelves and desks collapsed, books and equipment were
damaged, and the satellite receiver toppled, an
inauspicious start for a trading operation desperate to
revive itself.
The team forged ahead, with Berlekamp focused on
implementing some of the most promising
recommendations Ax had ignored. Simons, exhausted
from months of bickering with Ax, supported the idea.
“Let’s bank some sure things,” Berlekamp told
Simons.
Ax had resisted shifting to a more frequent, shortterm trading strategy, partly because he worried
brokerage commissions and other costs resulting from a
fast-paced, higher-frequency approach would offset
possible profits. Ax had also been concerned that rapid
trading would push prices enough to cut into any gains, a
cost called slippage, which Medallion couldn’t measure
with any accuracy.
These were legitimate concerns that had led to
something of an unwritten rule on Wall Street: Don’t
trade too much. Beyond the costs, short-term moves
generally yield tiny gains, exciting few investors. What’s
the point of working so hard and trading so frequently if
the upside is so limited?

“Like with baseball, motherhood, and apple pie, you
just didn’t question that view,” Berlekamp says.
Berlekamp hadn’t worked on Wall Street and was
inherently skeptical of long-held dogmas developed by
those he suspected weren’t especially sophisticated in
their analysis. He advocated for more short-term trades.
Too many of the firm’s long-term moves had been duds,
while Medallion’s short-term trades had proved its
biggest winners, thanks to the work of Ax, Carmona, and
others. It made sense to try to build on that success.
Berlekamp also enjoyed some good timing—by then,
most of Straus’s intraday data had been cleaned up,
making it easier to develop fresh ideas for shorter-term
trades.
Their goal remained the same: scrutinize historic
price information to discover sequences that might
repeat, under the assumption that investors will exhibit
similar behavior in the future. Simons’s team viewed the
approach as sharing some similarities with technical
trading. The Wall Street establishment generally viewed
this type of trading as something of a dark art, but
Berlekamp and his colleagues were convinced it could
work, if done in a sophisticated and scientific manner—
but only if their trading focused on short-term shifts
rather than longer-term trends.
Berlekamp also argued that buying and selling
infrequently magnifies the consequences of each move.
Mess up a couple times, and your portfolio could be
doomed. Make a lot of trades, however, and each
individual move is less important, reducing a portfolio’s
overall risk.
Berlekamp and his colleagues hoped Medallion could
resemble a gambling casino. Just as casinos handle so
many daily bets that they only need to profit from a bit
more than half of those wagers, the Axcom team wanted
their fund to trade so frequently that it could score big
profits by making money on a bare majority of its trades.

With a slight statistical edge, the law of large numbers
would be on their side, just as it is for casinos.
“If you trade a lot, you only need to be right 51
percent of the time,” Berlekamp argued to a colleague.
“We need a smaller edge on each trade.”
As they scrutinized their data, looking for short-term
trading strategies to add to Medallion’s trading model,
the team began identifying certain intriguing oddities in
the market. Prices for some investments often fell just
before key economic reports and rose right after, but
prices didn’t always fall before the reports came out and
didn’t always rise in the moments after. For whatever
reason, the pattern didn’t hold for the US Department of
Labor’s employment statistics and some other data
releases. But there was enough data to indicate when the
phenomena were most likely to take place, so the model
recommended purchases just before the economic
releases and sales almost immediately after them.
Searching for more, Berlekamp got on the phone
with Henry Laufer, who had agreed to spend more time
helping Simons turn Medallion around after Ax quit.
Laufer was in the basement of Simons’s office on Long
Island with a couple of research assistants from the
Stony Brook area trying to revamp Medallion’s trading
model, just as Berlekamp and Straus were doing in
Berkeley.
Sifting through Straus’s data, Laufer discovered
certain recurring trading sequences based on the day of
the week. Monday’s price action often followed Friday’s,
for example, while Tuesday saw reversions to earlier
trends. Laufer also uncovered how the previous day’s
trading often can predict the next day’s activity,
something he termed the twenty-four-hour effect. The
Medallion model began to buy late in the day on a Friday
if a clear up-trend existed, for instance, and then sell
early Monday, taking advantage of what they called the
weekend effect.

Simons and his researchers didn’t believe in
spending much time proposing and testing their own
intuitive trade ideas. They let the data point them to the
anomalies signaling opportunity. They also didn’t think
it made sense to worry about why these phenomena
existed. All that mattered was that they happened
frequently enough to include in their updated trading
system, and that they could be tested to ensure they
weren’t statistical flukes.
They did have theories. Berlekamp and others
developed a thesis that locals, or floor traders who buy or
sell commodities and bonds to keep the market
functioning, liked to go home at the end of a trading
week holding few or no futures contracts, just in case bad
news arose over the weekend that might saddle them
with losses. Similarly, brokers on the floors of
commodity exchanges seemed to trim futures positions
ahead of the economic reports to avoid the possibility
that unexpected news might cripple their holdings.
These traders got right back into their positions after
the weekend, or subsequent to the news releases, helping
prices rebound. Medallion’s system would buy when
these brokers sold, and sell the investments back to them
as they became more comfortable with the risk.
“We’re in the insurance business,” Berlekamp told
Straus.
Oddities in currency markets represented additional
attractive trades. Opportunity seemed especially rich in
the trading of deutsche marks. When the currency rose
one day, it had a surprising likelihood of climbing the
next day, as well. And when it fell, it often dropped the
next day, too. It didn’t seem to matter if the team looked
at the month-to-month, week-to-week, day-to-day, or
even hour-to-hour correlations; deutsche marks showed
an unusual propensity to trend from one period to the
next, trends that lasted longer than one might have
expected.

When you flip a coin, you have a 25 percent chance
of getting heads twice in a row, but there is no
correlation from one flip to the next. By contrast, Straus,
Laufer, and Berlekamp determined the correlation of
price moves in deutsche marks between any two
consecutive time periods was as much as 20 percent,
meaning that the sequence repeated more than half of
the time. By comparison, the team found a correlation
between consecutive periods of 10 percent or so for other
currencies, 7 percent for gold, 4 percent for hogs and
other commodities, and just 1 percent for stocks.
“The time scale doesn’t seem to matter,” Berlekamp
said to a colleague one day, with surprise. “We get the
same statistical anomaly.”
Correlations from one period to the next shouldn’t
happen with any frequency, at least according to most
economists at the time who had embraced the efficient
market hypothesis. Under this view, it’s impossible to
beat the market by taking advantage of price
irregularities—they shouldn’t exist. Once irregularities
are discovered, investors should step in to remove them,
the academics argued.
The sequences witnessed in the trading of deutsche
marks—and even stronger correlations found in the yen
—were so unexpected that the team felt the need to
understand why they might be happening. Straus found
academic papers arguing that global central banks have a
distaste for abrupt currency moves, which can disrupt
economies, so they step in to slow sharp moves in either
direction, thereby extending those trends over longer
periods of time. To Berlekamp, the slow pace at which
big companies like Eastman Kodak made business
decisions suggested that the economic forces behind
currency shifts likely played out over many months.
“People persist in their habits longer than they
should,” he says.

The currency moves were part of Medallion’s
growing mix of tradeable effects, in their developing
parlance. Berlekamp, Laufer, and Straus spent months
poring over their data, working long hours glued to their
computers, examining how prices reacted to tens of
thousands of market events. Simons checked in daily, in
person or on the phone, sharing his own ideas to
improve the trading system while encouraging the team
to focus on uncovering what he called “subtle anomalies”
others had overlooked.
Beyond the repeating sequences that seemed to make
sense, the system Berlekamp, Straus, and Laufer
developed spotted barely perceptible patterns in various
markets that had no apparent explanation. These trends
and oddities sometimes happened so quickly that they
were unnoticeable to most investors. They were so faint,
the team took to calling them ghosts, yet they kept
reappearing with enough frequency to be worthy
additions to their mix of trade ideas. Simons had come
around to the view that the whys didn’t matter, just that
the trades worked.
As the researchers worked to identify historic market
behavior, they wielded a big advantage: They had more
accurate pricing information than their rivals. For years,
Straus had collected the tick data featuring intraday
volume and pricing information for various futures, even
as most investors ignored such granular information.
Until 1989, Axcom generally relied on opening and
closing data, like most other investors; to that point,
much of the intraday data Straus had collected was
pretty much useless. But the more modern and powerful
MIPS (million instructions per second) computers in
their new offices gave the firm the ability to quickly parse
all the pricing data in Straus’s collection, generating
thousands of statistically significant observations within
the trading data to help reveal previously undetected
pricing patterns.

“We realized we had been saving intraday data,”
Straus says. “It wasn’t super clean, and it wasn’t all the
tick data,” but it was more reliable and plentiful than
what others were using.

=
By late 1989, after about six months of work, Berlekamp
and his colleagues were reasonably sure their rebuilt
trading system—focused on commodity, currency, and
bond markets—could prosper. Some of their anomalies
and trends lasted days, others just hours or even
minutes, but Berlekamp and Laufer were confident their
revamped system could take advantage of them. The
team found it difficult to pinpoint reliable trends for
stocks, but that didn’t seem to matter; they’d found
enough trading oddities in other markets.
Some of the trading signals they identified weren’t
especially novel or sophisticated. But many traders had
ignored them. Either the phenomena took place barely
more than 50 percent of the time, or they didn’t seem to
yield enough in profit to offset the trading costs.
Investors moved on, searching for juicier opportunities,
like fishermen ignoring the guppies in their nets, hoping
for bigger catch. By trading frequently, the Medallion
team figured it would be worthwhile to hold on to all the
guppies they were collecting.
The firm implemented its new approach in late 1989
with the $27 million Simons still managed. The results
were almost immediate, startling nearly everyone in the
office. They did more trading than ever, cutting
Medallion’s average holding time to just a day and a half
from a week and a half, scoring profits almost every day.
Just as suddenly, problems arose. Whenever
Medallion traded Canadian dollars, the fund seemed to
lose money. Almost every trade was a dud. It didn’t seem
to make sense—the model said Medallion should be

racking up money, but they were losing, over and over,
every day.
One afternoon, Berlekamp shared his frustrations
with Simons, who called a trader on the floor of the
Chicago Board of Trade to get his take on their problems.
“Don’t you know, Jim?” the trader told him, with a
chuckle. “Those guys are crooks.”
Only three traders on the exchange focused on
Canadian dollar futures, and they worked hand-in-hand
to take advantage of customers naive enough to transact
with them. When Simons’s team placed a buy order, the
brokers shared the information, and the traders
immediately purchased Canadian dollar contracts for
themselves, pushing the price up just a tad, before selling
to Simons and pocketing the difference as profit. They’d
do the opposite if Medallion was selling; the small
differences in price were enough to turn the Canadian
dollar trades into losers. It was one of Wall Street’s
oldest tricks, but Berlekamp and his fellow academics
were oblivious to the practice. Simons immediately
eliminated Canadian dollar contracts from Medallion’s
trading system.
A few months later, in early 1990, Simons called
Berlekamp with even more unsettling news.
“There’s a rumor Stotler is in trouble,” Simons said,
anxiety in his voice.
Berlekamp was stunned. Every single one of
Medallion’s positions was held in accounts at the Stotler
Group, a commodity-trading firm run by Karsten
Mahlmann, the top elected official at the Chicago Board
of Trade. Berlekamp and others had viewed Stotler as the
safest and most reliable brokerage firm in Chicago. If
Stotler went under, their account would be frozen. In the
weeks it would likely take to sort out, tens of millions of
dollars of futures contracts would be in limbo, likely
leading to devastating losses. Straus’s sources at the

exchange confided that Stotler was struggling with heavy
debt, adding to the nervousness.
These were just rumors, though. Shifting all of their
trades and accounts to other brokers would be
cumbersome, time-consuming, and cost Medallion
money just as it was turning things around. Stotler had
long been among the most powerful and prestigious
firms in the business, suggesting it could survive any
setback. Berlekamp told Simons he was unsure what to
do.
Simons couldn’t understand his indecision.
“Elwyn, when you smell smoke, you get the hell out!”
Simons told him.
Straus closed the brokerage account and shifted their
trades elsewhere. Months later, Mahlmann resigned
from Stotler and the Chicago Board of Trade; two days
later, Stotler filed for bankruptcy. Eventually, regulators
charged the firm with fraud.
Simons and his firm had narrowly escaped a likely
death blow.

=
For much of 1990, Simons’s team could do little wrong,
as if they had discovered a magic formula after a decade
of fumbling around in the lab. Rather than transact only
at the open and close of trading each day, Berlekamp,
Laufer, and Straus traded at noon, as well. Their system
became mostly short-term moves, with long-term trades
representing about 10 percent of activity.
One day, Axcom made more than $1 million, a first
for the firm. Simons rewarded the team with champagne,
much as the IDA’s staff had passed around flutes of
bubbly after discovering solutions to thorny problems.
The one-day gains became so frequent that the drinking
got a bit out of hand; Simons had to send word that

champagne should be handed out only if returns rose 3
percent in a day, a shift that did little to dampen the
team’s giddiness.
For all the gains, few outside the office shared the
same regard for the group’s approach. When Berlekamp
explained his firm’s methods to business students on
Berkeley’s campus, some mocked him.
“We were viewed as flakes with ridiculous ideas,”
Berlekamp says.
Fellow professors were polite enough not to share
their criticism and skepticism, at least within earshot.
But Berlekamp knew what they were thinking.
“Colleagues avoided or evaded commenting,” he
says.
Simons didn’t care about the doubters; the gains
reinforced his conviction that an automated trading
system could beat the market.
“There’s a real opportunity here,” he told Berlekamp,
his enthusiasm growing.
Medallion scored a gain of 55.9 percent in 1990, a
dramatic improvement on its 4 percent loss the previous
year. The profits were especially impressive because they
were over and above the hefty fees charged by the fund,
which amounted to 5 percent* of all assets managed and
20 percent of all gains generated by the fund.
Just a year or so earlier, Simons had been as involved
in his side businesses as he was in the hedge fund. Now
he was convinced the team was finally on to something
special and wanted to be a bigger part of it. Simons
dialed Berlekamp, over and over, almost every day.
In early August of that year, after Iraq invaded
Kuwait, sending gold and oil prices soaring, Simons
called Berlekamp, encouraging him to add gold and oil
futures contracts to the system’s mix.

“Elwyn, have you looked at gold?”
It turned out that Simons still did some trading on
his own, charting the technical patterns of various
commodities. He wanted to share the bullish insights he
had developed about various gold investments.
Berlekamp listened to the advice politely, as usual,
before telling Simons it would be best to let the model
run the show and avoid adjusting algorithms they had
worked so hard to perfect.
“Okay, go back to what you were doing,” Simons
said.
A bit later, as gold shot even higher, he phoned
again: “It went up more, Elwyn!”
Berlekamp was baffled. It was Simons who had
pushed to develop a computerized trading system free of
human involvement, and it was Simons who wanted to
rely on the scientific method, testing overlooked
anomalies rather than using crude charts or gut instinct.
Berlekamp, Laufer, and the rest of the team had worked
diligently to remove humans from the trading loop as
much as possible. Now Simons was saying he had a good
feeling about gold prices and wanted to tweak the
system?
“Jim believed the fund should be managed
systematically, but he was fussing around when he had
time, five to ten hours a week, trading gold or copper,
thinking he was learning something,” Berlekamp says.
Much like Baum and Ax before him, Simons couldn’t
help reacting to the news.
Berlekamp pushed back.
“Like I said, Jim, we’re not going to adjust our
positions,” a peeved Berlekamp told Simons one day.
Hanging up, Berlekamp turned to a colleague: “The
system will determine what we trade.”

Simons never ordered any major trades, but he did
get Berlekamp to buy some oil call options to serve as
“insurance” in case crude prices kept rising as the Gulf
War began, and he scaled the fund’s overall positions
back by a third as Middle East hostilities continued to
flare.
Simons felt a need to explain the adjustments to his
clients.
“We must still rely on human judgment and manual
intervention to cope with a drastic, sudden change,” he
explained in a letter that month.
Simons kept on calling Berlekamp, who grew
increasingly exasperated.
“One day he called me four times,” he says. “It was
annoying.”
Simons phoned again, this time to tell Berlekamp he
wanted the research team moved to Long Island. Simons
had lured Laufer back as a full-time member of the team,
and Simons wanted to play a larger role running the
trading effort. On Long Island, he argued, they could all
be together, an idea that Berlekamp and Straus resisted.
As the year wore on, Simons began telling Berlekamp
how much better the fund, which now managed nearly
$40 million, should be doing. Simons was enthusiastic
about the model’s most recent tweaks and convinced
Medallion was on the verge of remarkable success.
“Let’s work on the system,” Simons said one day.
“Next year we should get it up to 80 percent.”
Berlekamp could not believe what he was hearing.
“We’re lucky in some respects, Jim,” Berlekamp told
Simons, hoping to rein in his exuberance.
Hanging up, Berlekamp shook his head in
frustration. Medallion’s gains already were staggering.
He doubted the hedge fund could keep its hot streak

going at the same pace, let alone improve on its
performance.
Simons made still more requests. He wanted to
expand the team, purchase additional satellite dishes for
the roof, and spend on other infrastructure that would
allow them to upgrade Medallion’s computerized trading
system. He asked Berlekamp to chip in to pay for the new
expenses.
The pressures wore on Berlekamp. He had remained
a part-time professor at Berkeley and found himself
enjoying his classes more than ever, likely because they
didn’t involve someone looking over his shoulder at all
hours.
“Jim was calling a lot, and I was having more fun
teaching,” Berlekamp explains.
It became more than he could bear. Finally,
Berlekamp phoned Simons with an offer.
“Jim, if you think we’re going to be up 80 percent,
and I think we can do 30 percent, you must think the
company is worth a lot more than I do,” Berlekamp said.
“So why don’t you buy me out?”
Which is exactly what Simons did. In December
1990, Axcom was disbanded; Simons purchased
Berlekamp’s ownership interest for cash, while Straus
and Ax traded their Axcom stakes for shares in
Renaissance, which began to manage the Medallion
fund. Berlekamp returned to Berkeley to teach and do
full-time math research, selling his Axcom shares at a
price that amounted to six times what he had paid just
sixteen months earlier, a deal he thought was an absolute
steal.
“It never occurred to me that we’d go through the
roof,” Berlekamp says.
Later, Berlekamp started an investment firm,
Berkeley Quantitative, which did its own trading of

futures contracts and, at one point, managed over $200
million. It closed in 2012 after recording middling
returns.
“I was always motivated more by curiosity,”
Berlekamp says. “Jim was focused on money.”
In the spring of 2019, Berlekamp died from
complications of pulmonary fibrosis at the age of
seventy-eight.

=
Berlekamp, Ax, and Baum had all left the firm, but
Simons wasn’t especially concerned. He was sure he had
developed a surefire method to invest in a systematic
way, using computers and algorithms to trade
commodities, bonds, and currencies in a manner that
can be seen as a more scientific and sophisticated version
of technical trading, one that entailed searching for
overlooked patterns in the market.
Simons was a mathematician with a limited
understanding of the history of investing, however. He
didn’t realize his approach wasn’t as original as he
believed. Simons also wasn’t aware of how many traders
had crashed and burned using similar methods. Some
traders employing similar tactics even had substantial
head starts on him.
To truly conquer financial markets, Simons would
have to overcome a series of imposing obstacles that he
didn’t even realize were in his way.

CHAPTER SEVEN

W straightforward insight: Historic patterns can form
hat had Jim Simons so excited in late 1990 was a

the basis of computer models capable of identifying
overlooked and ongoing market trends, allowing one to
divine the future from the past. Simons had long held
this view, but his recent big gains convinced him the
approach was a winner.
Simons hadn’t spent much time delving into
financial history, though. Had he done so, Simons might
have realized that his approach wasn’t especially novel.
For centuries, speculators had embraced various forms
of pattern recognition, relying on methods that bore
similarity to some of the things Renaissance was doing.
The fact that many of these colorful characters had failed
miserably, or were outright charlatans, didn’t augur well
for Simons.
The roots of Simons’s investing style reached as far
back as Babylonian times, when early traders recorded
the prices of barley, dates, and other crops on clay
tablets, hoping to forecast future moves. In the middle of
the sixteenth century, a trader in Nuremberg, Germany,
named Christopher Kurz won acclaim for his supposed
ability to forecast twenty-day prices of cinnamon,
pepper, and other spices. Like much of society at the
time, Kurz relied on astrological signs, but he also tried
to back-test his signals, deducing certain credible
principles along the way, such as the fact that prices
often move in long-persisting trends.
An eighteenth-century Japanese rice merchant and
speculator named Munehisa Homma, known as the “god
of the markets,” invented a charting method to visualize

the open, high, low, and closing price levels for the
country’s rice exchanges over a period of time. Homma’s
charts, including the classic candlestick pattern, resulted
in an early and reasonably sophisticated reversion-tothe-mean trading strategy. Homma argued that markets
are governed by emotions, and that “speculators should
learn to take losses quickly and let their profits run”—
tactics embraced by future traders.1
In the 1830s, British economists sold sophisticated
price charts to investors. Later that century, an American
journalist named Charles Dow, who devised the Dow
Jones Industrial Average and helped launch the Wall
Street Journal, applied a level of mathematical rigor to
various market hypotheses, birthing modern technical
analysis, which relies on the charting of distinct price
trends, trading volume, and other factors.
In the early twentieth century, a financial
prognosticator named William D. Gann gained a rabid
following despite the dubious nature of his record.
Legend has it that Gann was born to a poor Baptist
family on a cotton ranch in Texas. He quit grammar
school to help his family members in the fields, gaining
his only financial education at a local cotton warehouse.
Gann ended up in New York City, where he opened a
brokerage firm in 1908, developing a reputation for
skillfully reading price charts, pinpointing and
anticipating cycles and retracements.
A line from Ecclesiastes guided Gann’s moves: “That
which has been is that which shall be . . . there is nothing
new under the sun.” To Gann, the phrase suggested that
historic reference points are the key to unlocking trading
profits. Gann’s renown grew, based partly on a claim
that, in a single month, he turned $130 into $12,000.
Loyalists credited Gann with predicting everything from
the Great Depression to the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Gann concluded that a universal, natural order governed
all facets of life—something he called the Law of

Vibration—and that geometric sequences and angles
could be used to predict market action. To this day, Gann
analysis remains a reasonably popular branch of
technical trading.
Gann’s investing record was never substantiated,
however, and his fans tended to overlook some colossal
bloopers. In 1936, for example, Gann said, “I am
confident the Dow Jones Industrial Average will never
sell at 386 again,” meaning he was sure the Dow
wouldn’t again reach that level, a prediction that didn’t
quite stand the test of time. The fact that Gann wrote
eight books and penned a daily investment newsletter,
yet managed to share few details of his trading approach
and, by some accounts, died with a net worth of only
$100,000 raises other questions.2
“He was a financial astrologer of sorts,” concludes
Andrew Lo, a professor at the MIT Sloan School of
Management.
Decades later, Gerald Tsai Jr. used technical
analysis, among other tactics, to become the most
influential investor of the raging late 1960s. Tsai gained
prominence at Fidelity Investments, where he rode
momentum stocks to fortune, becoming the first growthfund manager. Later, Tsai launched his own firm, the
Manhattan Fund, a much-hyped darling of the era. Tsai
built a war room featuring sliding and rotating charts
tracking hundreds of averages, ratios, and oscillators. He
kept the room a frigid fifty-five degrees, trying to ensure
that the three full-time staff members tasked with
updating the figures remained fully alert and attentive.
The Manhattan Fund was crushed in the 1969–70
bear market, its performance and methods ridiculed. By
then, Tsai had sold out to an insurance company and was
busy helping turn financial-services company Primerica
into a key building block for the banking power that
became Citigroup.3

Over time, technical traders became targets of
derision, their strategies viewed as simplistic and lazy at
best, voodoo science at worst. Despite the ridicule, many
investors continue to chart financial markets, tracing
head and shoulders formations and other common
configurations and patterns. Some top, modern traders,
including Stanley Druckenmiller, consult charts to
confirm existing investment theses. Professor Lo and
others argue that technical analysts were the
“forerunners” of quantitative investing. However, their
methods were never subjected to independent and
thorough testing, and most of their rules arose from a
mysterious combination of human pattern recognition
and reasonable-sounding rules of thumb, raising
questions about their efficacy.4
Like the technical traders before him, Simons
practiced a form of pattern analysis and searched for
telltale sequences and correlations in market data. He
hoped to have a bit more luck than investors before him
by doing his trading in a more scientific manner,
however. Simons agreed with Berlekamp that technical
indicators were better at guiding short-term trades than
long-term investments. But Simons hoped rigorous
testing and sophisticated predictive models, based on
statistical analysis rather than eyeballing price charts,
might help him escape the fate of the chart adherents
who had crashed and burned.
But Simons didn’t realize that others were busy
crafting similar strategies, some using their own highpowered computers and mathematical algorithms.
Several of these traders already had made enormous
progress, suggesting that Simons was playing catch-up.
Indeed, as soon as the computer age dawned, there
were investors, up bright and early, using computers to
solve markets. As early as 1965, Barron’s magazine
spoke of the “immeasurable” rewards computers could
render investors, and how the machines were capable of

relieving an analyst of “dreary labor, freeing him for
more creative activity.” Around the same time, the Wall
Street Journal gushed about how computers could rank
and filter large numbers of stocks almost
instantaneously. In The Money Game, the classic finance
book of the period, author George Goodman, employing
the pseudonym Adam Smith, mocked the “computer
people” beginning to invade Wall Street.
While a segment of the investment world used
machines to guide their investing and other tasks, the
technology wasn’t yet available to do even mildly
challenging statistical analysis, nor was there much need
for models with any level of sophistication, since finance
wasn’t especially mathematical at the time. Still, a
Chicago-based trader named Richard Dennis managed to
build a trading system governed by specific, preset rules
aimed at removing emotions and irrationality from his
trades, not unlike the approach Simons was so excited
about. As Renaissance staffers struggled to improve their
model throughout the 1980s, they kept hearing about
Dennis’s successes. At the age of twenty-six, he already
was a distinctive presence on the floor of the Chicago
Board of Trade, enough so to warrant a sobriquet: the
“Prince of the Pit.” Dennis had thick, gold-framed
glasses, a stomach that protruded over his belt, and
thinning, frizzy hair that fell “like a beagle’s ears around
his face,” in the words of an interviewer at the time.
Dennis was so confident in his system, which chased
market trends, that he codified its rules and shared them
with twenty or so recruits he called “turtles.” He staked
his newbies with cash and sent them off to do their own
trading, hoping to win a long-running debate with a
friend that his tactics were so foolproof they could help
even the uninitiated become market mavens. Some of the
turtles saw striking success. Dennis himself is said to
have made $80 million in 1986 and managed about $100
million a year later. He was crushed in 1987’s market

turbulence, however, the latest trader with a style that
bore a resemblance to Simons’s to crash and burn. After
squandering about half his cash, Dennis took a break
from trading to focus on liberal political causes and the
legalization of marijuana, among other things.
“There is more to life than trading,” he told an
interviewer at the time.5
Throughout the 1980s, applied mathematicians and
ex-physicists were recruited to work on Wall Street and
in the City of London. They usually were tasked with
building models to place values on complicated
derivatives and mortgage products, analyze risk, and
hedge, or protect, investment positions, activities that
became known as forms of financial engineering.
It took a little while for the finance industry to come
up with a nickname for those designing and
implementing these mathematical models. At first, they
were called rocket scientists by those who assumed
rocketry was the most advanced branch of science, says
Emanuel Derman, who received a PhD in theoretical
physics at Columbia University before joining a Wall
Street firm. Over time, these specialists became known
as quants, short for specialists in quantitative finance.
For years, Derman recalls, senior managers at banks and
investment firms, many of whom prided themselves on
maintaining an ignorance of computers, employed the
term as a pejorative. When he joined Goldman Sachs in
1985, Derman says, he “instantly noticed the shame
involved in being numerate . . . it was bad taste for two
consenting adults to talk math or UNIX or C in the
company of traders, salespeople, and bankers.
“People around you averted their gaze,” Derman
writes in his autobiography, My Life as a Quant.6
There were good reasons to be skeptical of the
“computer people.” For one thing, their sophisticated
hedging didn’t always work so perfectly. On October 19,

1987, the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 23
percent, the largest one-day decline ever, a drop blamed
on the widespread embrace of portfolio insurance, a
hedging technique in which investors’ computers sold
stock-index futures at the first sign of a decline to protect
against deeper pain. The selling sent prices down further,
of course, leading to even more computerized selling and
the eventual rout.
A quarter century later, legendary New York Times
financial columnist Floyd Norris called it, “the beginning
of the destruction of markets by dumb computers. Or, to
be fair to the computers, by computers programmed by
fallible people and trusted by people who did not
understand the computer programs’ limitations. As
computers came in, human judgment went out.”
During the 1980s, Professor Benoit Mandelbrot—
who had demonstrated that certain jagged mathematical
shapes called fractals mimic irregularities found in
nature—argued that financial markets also have fractal
patterns. This theory suggested that markets will deliver
more unexpected events than widely assumed, another
reason to doubt the elaborate models produced by highpowered computers. Mandelbrot’s work would reinforce
the views of trader-turned-author Nassim Nicholas Taleb
and others that popular math tools and risk models are
incapable of sufficiently preparing investors for large and
highly unpredictable deviations from historic patterns—
deviations that occur more frequently than most models
suggest.
Partly due to these concerns, those tinkering with
models and machines usually weren’t allowed to trade or
invest. Instead, they were hired to help—and stay out of
the way of—the traders and other important people
within banks and investment firms. In the 1970s, a
Berkeley economics professor named Barr Rosenberg
developed quantitative models to track the factors
influencing stocks. Rather than make a fortune trading

himself, Rosenberg sold computerized programs to help
other investors forecast stock behavior.
Edward Thorp became the first modern
mathematician to use quantitative strategies to invest
sizable sums of money. Thorp was an academic who had
worked with Claude Shannon, the father of information
theory, and embraced the proportional betting system of
John Kelly, the Texas scientist who had influenced Elwyn
Berlekamp. First, Thorp applied his talents to gambling,
gaining prominence for his large winnings as well as his
bestselling book, Beat the Dealer. The book outlined
Thorp’s belief in systematic, rules-based gambling
tactics, as well as his insight that players can take
advantage of shifting odds within games of chance.
In 1964, Thorp turned his attention to Wall Street,
the biggest casino of them all. After reading books on
technical analysis—as well as Benjamin Graham and
David Dodd’s landmark tome, Security Analysis, which
laid the foundations for fundamental investing—Thorp
was “surprised and encouraged by how little was known
by so many,” he writes in his autobiography, A Man for
All Markets.7
Thorp zeroed in on stock warrants, which give the
holder the ability to purchase shares at a certain price.
He developed a formula for determining the “correct”
price of a warrant, which gave him the ability to detect
market mispricings instantly. Programming a HewlettPackard 9830 computer, Thorp used his mathematical
formula to buy cheap warrants and bet against expensive
ones, a tactic that protected his portfolio from jolts in the
broader market.
During the 1970s, Thorp helped lead a hedge fund,
Princeton/Newport Partners, recording strong gains and
attracting well-known investors—including actor Paul
Newman, Hollywood producer Robert Evans, and
screenwriter Charles Kaufman. Thorp’s firm based its
trading on computer-generated algorithms and

economic models, using so much electricity that their
office in Southern California was always boiling hot.
Thorp’s trading formula was influenced by the
doctoral thesis of French mathematician Louis Bachelier,
who, in 1900, developed a theory for pricing options on
the Paris stock exchange using equations similar to those
later employed by Albert Einstein to describe the
Brownian motion of pollen particles. Bachelier’s thesis,
describing the irregular motion of stock prices, had been
overlooked for decades, but Thorp and others
understood its relevance to modern investing.
In 1974, Thorp landed on the front page of the Wall
Street Journal in a story headlined: “Computer
Formulas Are One Man’s Secret to Success in Market.” A
year later, his fortune swelling, he was driving a new red
Porsche 911S. To Thorp, relying on computer models to
trade warrants, options, convertible bonds, and other socalled derivative securities was the only reasonable
investing approach.
“A model is a simplified version of reality, like a
street map that shows you how to travel from one part of
the city to another,” he writes. “If you got them right,
[you] could then use the rules to predict what would
happen in new situations.”
Skeptics sniffed—one told the Journal that “the real
investment world is too complicated to be reduced to a
model.” Yet, by the late 1980s, Thorp’s fund stood at
nearly $300 million, dwarfing the $25 million Simons’s
Medallion fund was managing at the time. But
Princeton/Newport was ensnared in the trading scandal
centered on junk-bond king Michael Milken in nearby
Los Angeles, ending any hopes Thorp held of becoming
an investment power.
Thorp never was accused of any impropriety, and the
government eventually dropped all charges related to
Princeton/Newport’s activities, but publicity related to

the investigation crippled his fund, and it closed in late
1988, a denouement Thorp describes as “traumatic.”
Over its nineteen-year existence, the hedge fund featured
annual gains averaging more than 15 percent (after
charging investors various fees), topping the market’s
returns over that span.
Were it not for the government’s actions, “we’d be
billionaires,” Thorp says.

=
Gerry Bamberger had few visions of wealth or
prominence in the early 1980s. A tall, trim computerscience graduate from Columbia University, Bamberger
provided analytical and technical support for Morgan
Stanley’s stock traders, serving as an underappreciated
cog in the investment bank’s machine. When the traders
prepared to buy and sell big chunks of shares for clients,
acquiring a few million dollars of Coca-Cola, for example,
they protected themselves by selling an equal amount of
something similar, like Pepsi, in what is commonly
referred to as a pairs trade. Bamberger created software
to update the Morgan Stanley traders’ results, though
many of them bristled at the idea of getting assistance
from the resident computer nerd.
Watching the traders buy big blocks of shares,
Bamberger observed that prices often moved higher, as
might be expected. Prices headed lower when Morgan
Stanley’s traders sold blocks of shares. Each time, the
trading activity altered the gap, or spread, between the
stock in question and the other company in the pair,
even when there was no news in the market. An order to
sell a chunk of Coke shares, for instance, might send that
stock down a percentage point or even two, even as Pepsi
barely moved. Once the effect of their Coke stock selling
wore off, the spread between the shares reverted to the

norm, which made sense, since there had been no reason
for Coke’s drop other than Morgan Stanley’s activity.
Bamberger sensed opportunity. If the bank created a
database tracking the historic prices of various paired
stocks, it could profit simply by betting on the return of
these price-spreads to their historic levels after block
trades or other unusual activity. Bamberger’s bosses
were swayed, setting him up with half a million dollars
and a small staff. Bamberger began developing computer
programs to take advantage of “temporary blips” of
paired shares. An Orthodox Jew and a heavy smoker
with a wry sense of humor, Bamberger brought a tuna
sandwich in a brown bag for lunch every single day. By
1985, he was implementing his strategy with six or seven
stocks at a time, while managing $30 million, scoring
profits for Morgan Stanley.8
Big bureaucratic companies often act like, well, big
bureaucratic companies. That’s why Morgan Stanley
soon gave Bamberger a new boss, Nunzio Tartaglia, a
perceived insult that sparked Bamberger to quit. (He
joined Ed Thorp’s hedge fund, where he did similar
trades and eventually retired a millionaire.)
A short, wiry astrophysicist, Tartaglia managed the
Morgan Stanley trading group very differently from his
predecessor. A native of Brooklyn who had bounced
around Wall Street, Tartaglia’s edges were sharper.
Once, when a new colleague approached to introduce
himself, Tartaglia immediately cut him off.
“Don’t try to get anything by me because I come from
out there,” Tartaglia said, pointing a finger at a nearby
window and the streets of New York City.9
Tartaglia renamed his group Automated Proprietary
Trading, or APT, and moved it to a forty-foot-long room
on the nineteenth floor of Morgan Stanley’s headquarters
in a midtown Manhattan skyscraper. He added more
automation to the system and, by 1987, it was generating

$50 million of annual profits. Team members didn’t
know a thing about the stocks they traded and didn’t
need to—their strategy was simply to wager on the reemergence of historic relationships between shares, an
extension of the age-old “buy low, sell high” investment
adage, this time using computer programs and lightningfast trades.
New hires, including a former Columbia University
computer-science professor named David Shaw and
mathematician Robert Frey, improved profits. The
Morgan Stanley traders became some of the first to
embrace the strategy of statistical arbitrage, or stat arb.
This generally means making lots of concurrent trades,
most of which aren’t correlated to the overall market but
are aimed at taking advantage of statistical anomalies or
other market behavior. The team’s software ranked
stocks by their gains or losses over the previous weeks,
for example. APT would then sell short, or bet against,
the top 10 percent of the winners within an industry
while buying the bottom 10 percent of the losers on the
expectation that these trading patterns would revert. It
didn’t always happen, of course, but when implemented
enough times, the strategy resulted in annual profits of
20 percent, likely because investors often tend to
overreact to both good and bad news before calming
down and helping to restore historic relationships
between stocks.
By 1988, APT was among the largest and mostsecretive trading teams in the world, buying and selling
$900 million worth of shares each day. The unit hit
heavy losses that year, though, and Morgan Stanley
executives slashed APT’s capital by two-thirds. Senior
management never had been comfortable investing by
relying on computer models, and jealousies had grown
about how much money Tartaglia’s team was making.
Soon, Tartaglia was out of a job, and the group shut
down.

It wouldn’t be clear for many years, but Morgan
Stanley had squandered some of the most lucrative
trading strategies in the history of finance.

=
Well before the APT group closed for business, Robert
Frey had become anxious. It wasn’t just that his boss,
Tartaglia, wasn’t getting along with his superiors,
suggesting the bank might drop the team if losses arose.
Frey, a heavyset man with a limp, the result of a fall in
his youth that had shattered his leg and hip, was
convinced rivals were catching on to his group’s
strategies. Thorp’s fund was already doing similar kinds
of trades, and Frey figured others were sure to follow. He
had to come up with new tactics.
Frey proposed deconstructing the movements of
various stocks by identifying the independent variables
responsible for those moves. A surge in Exxon, for
example, could be attributable to multiple factors, such
as moves in oil prices, the value of the dollar, the
momentum of the overall market, and more. A rise in
Procter & Gamble might be most attributable to its
healthy balance sheet and a growing demand for safe
stocks, as investors soured on companies with lots of
debt. If so, selling groups of stocks with robust balance
sheets and buying those with heavy debt might be called
for, if data showed the performance gap between the
groups had moved beyond historic bounds. A handful of
investors and academics were mulling factor investing
around that same time, but Frey wondered if he could do
a better job using computational statistics and other
mathematical techniques to isolate the true factors
moving shares.
Frey and his colleagues couldn’t muster much
interest among the Morgan Stanley brass for their
innovative factor approach.

“They told me not to rock the boat,” Frey recalls.
Frey quit, contacting Jim Simons and winning his
financial backing to start a new company, Kepler
Financial Management. Frey and a few others set up
dozens of small computers to bet on his statisticalarbitrage strategy. Almost immediately, he received a
threatening letter from Morgan Stanley’s lawyers. Frey
hadn’t stolen anything, but his approach had been
developed working for Morgan Stanley. Frey was in luck,
though. He remembered that Tartaglia hadn’t allowed
him or anyone else in his group to sign the bank’s
nondisclosure or noncompete agreements. Tartaglia had
wanted the option of taking his team to a rival if their
bonuses ever disappointed. As a result, Morgan Stanley
didn’t have strong legal grounds to stop Frey’s trading.
With some trepidation, he ignored Morgan Stanley’s
continuing threats and began trading.

=
By 1990, Simons had high hopes Frey and Kepler might
find success with their stock trades. He was even more
enthused about his own Medallion fund and its
quantitative-trading strategies in bond, commodity, and
currency markets. Competition was building, however,
with some rivals embracing similar trading strategies.
Simons’s biggest competition figured to come from
David Shaw, another refugee of the Morgan Stanley APT
group. After leaving the bank in 1988, the thirty-sixyear-old Shaw, who had received his PhD from Stanford
University, was courted by Goldman Sachs and was
unsure whether to accept the job offer. To discuss his
options, Shaw turned to hedge-fund manager Donald
Sussman, who took Shaw sailing on Long Island Sound.
One day on Sussman’s forty-five-foot sloop turned into
three, as the pair debated what Shaw should do.

“I think I can use technology to trade securities,”
Shaw told Sussman.
Sussman suggested that Shaw start his own hedge
fund, rather than work for Goldman Sachs, offering a
$28 million initial seed investment. Shaw was swayed,
launching D. E. Shaw in an office space above Revolution
Books, a communist bookstore in a then-gritty part of
Manhattan’s Union Square area. One of Shaw’s first
moves was to purchase two ultrafast and expensive Sun
Microsystems computers.
“He needed Ferraris,” Sussman says. “We bought
him Ferraris.”10
Shaw, a supercomputing expert, hired math and
science PhDs who embraced his scientific approach to
trading. He also brought on whip-smart employees from
different backgrounds. English and philosophy majors
were among Shaw’s favorite hires, but he also hired a
chess master, stand-up comedians, published writers, an
Olympic-level fencer, a trombone player, and a
demolitions specialist.
“We didn’t want anyone with preconceived notions,”
an early executive says.11
Unlike the boisterous trading rooms of most Wall
Street firms, Shaw’s offices were quiet and somber,
reminding visitors of the research room of the Library of
Congress, even as employees wore jeans and T-shirts.
These were the early days of the internet, and academics
were the only ones using email at the time, but Shaw
gushed to one of his programmers about the new era’s
possibilities.
“I think people will buy things on the internet,” Shaw
told a colleague. “Not only will they shop, but when they
buy something . . . they’re going to say, ‘this pipe is good,’
or ‘this pipe is bad,’ and they’re going to post reviews.”

One programmer, Jeffrey Bezos, worked with Shaw a
few more years before piling his belongings into a
moving van and driving to Seattle, his then-wife
MacKenzie behind the wheel. Along the way, Bezos
worked on a laptop, pecking out a business plan for his
company, Amazon.com. (He originally chose “Cadabra”
but dropped the name because too many people mistook
it for “Cadaver.”)12
Almost as soon as he started the engines of his
Ferraris, Shaw’s hedge fund minted money. Soon, it was
managing several hundred million dollars, trading an
array of equity-related investments, and boasting over
one hundred employees.
Jim Simons didn’t have a clear understanding of the
kind of progress Shaw and a few others were making. He
did know, if he was going to build something special to
catch up with those who had a jump on him, he’d need
some help. Simons called Sussman, the financier who
had given David Shaw the support he needed to start his
own hedge fund, hoping for a similar boost.

CHAPTER EIGHT

J Avenue.

im Simons’s pulse quickened as he approached Sixth

It was a sultry summer afternoon, but Simons wore a
jacket and tie, hoping to impress. He had his work cut
out for him. By 1991, David Shaw and a few other
upstarts were using computer models to trade stocks.
Those few members of the Wall Street establishment
aware of the approach mostly scoffed at it, however.
Relying on inscrutable algorithms, as Simons was doing,
seemed ludicrous, even dangerous. Some called it black
box investing—hard to explain and likely masking
serious risk. Huge sums of money were being made the
old-fashioned way, blending thoughtful research with
honed instincts. Who needed Simons and his fancy
computers?
Awaiting Simons in a tall midtown Manhattan office
tower was Donald Sussman, a forty-five-year-old Miami
native who was something of a heretic on Wall Street.
More than two decades earlier, as an undergraduate at
Columbia University, Sussman took a leave of absence to
work in a small brokerage firm. There, he stumbled upon
an obscure strategy to trade convertible bonds, a
particularly knotty investment. Sussman convinced his
bosses to shell out $2,000 for an early-generation
electronic calculator so he could quickly determine which
bond was most attractive. Calculator in hand, Sussman
made the firm millions of dollars in profits, a windfall
that opened his eyes to how technology could render an
advantage.
Now the six-foot-three, broad-shouldered,
mustachioed Sussman ran a fund called Paloma Partners

that was backing Shaw’s rapidly expanding hedge-fund
firm, D. E. Shaw. Sussman suspected mathematicians
and scientists might one day rival, or even best, the
largest trading firms, no matter the conventional wisdom
in the business. Word was out that he was open to
investing in additional computer-focused traders, giving
Simons hope he might gain Sussman’s support.
Simons had discarded a thriving academic career to
do something special in the investing world. But, after a
full decade in the business, he was managing barely more
than $45 million, a mere quarter the assets of Shaw’s
firm. The meeting had import—backing from Sussman
could help Renaissance hire employees, upgrade
technology, and become a force on Wall Street.
Sussman had been one of Simons’s earliest investors,
but he suffered losses and withdrew his money, an
experience that suggested Sussman might be skeptical of
his visitor. Simons’s trading algorithms had recently
been revamped, however, and he was bursting with
confidence. He strode into Sussman’s building, a block
from Carnegie Hall, rode an elevator to the thirty-first
floor, and stepped into an expansive conference room
with panoramic views of Central Park and a large
whiteboard for visiting quants to scribble their
equations.
Eyeing Simons across a long, narrow wooden table,
Sussman couldn’t help smiling. His guest was bearded,
balding, and graying, bearing little resemblance to most
of the investors who made regular pilgrimages to his
office asking for money. Simons’s tie was slightly askew,
and his jacket tweed, a rarity on Wall Street. He came
alone, without the usual entourage of handlers and
advisors. Simons was just the kind of brainy investor
Sussman enjoyed helping.
“He looked like an academic,” Sussman recalls.

Simons began his pitch, relaying how his Medallion
hedge fund had refined its approach. Assured and
plainspoken, Simons spent more than an hour outlining
his firm’s performance, risks, and volatility, and he
broadly described his new short-term model.
“Now I really have it,” Simons enthused. “We’ve had
a breakthrough.”
He asked Sussman for a $10 million investment in
his hedge fund, expressing certainty he could generate
big gains and grow Renaissance into a major investment
firm.
“I’ve had a revelation,” Simons said. “I can do it in
size.”
Sussman listened patiently. He was impressed. There
was no way he was giving Simons any money, though.
Privately, Sussman worried about potential conflicts of
interest, since he was the sole source of capital for Shaw’s
hedge fund. He was even helping Shaw’s firm hire
academics and traders to extend its lead over Simons
and other fledgling quantitative traders. If Sussman had
cash to spare, he figured, he probably should put it in D.
E. Shaw. Besides, Shaw was scoring annual gains of 40
percent. Renaissance didn’t seem to have a shot at
matching those gains.
“Why would I give money to a theoretical
competitor?” Sussman asked Simons. “I’m sorry, but I
already have David.”
They stood up, shook hands, and promised to stay in
touch. As Simons turned to leave, Sussman noticed a
fleeting look of disappointment on his face.
Simons didn’t have much more luck with other
potential backers. Investors wouldn’t say it to his face,
but most deemed it absurd to rely on trading models
generated by computers. Just as preposterous were
Simons’s fees, especially his requirement that investors

hand over 5 percent of the money he managed for them
each year, well above the 2 percent levied by most hedge
funds.
“I pay the fees, too,” Simons told one potential
investor, noting that he also was an investor in
Medallion. “Why shouldn’t you?”
Simons didn’t get very far with that logic; the fees he
paid went right back to his own firm, rendering his
argument unconvincing. Simons was especially
hamstrung by the fact that his fund had fewer than two
years of impressive returns.
When a Wall Street veteran named Anita Rival met
with Simons in his Manhattan office to discuss an
investment from the firm she represented, she became
the latest to snub him.
“He wouldn’t explain how the computer models
worked,” she recalls. “You couldn’t understand what he
was doing.”
Within Renaissance, word circulated that
Commodities Corporation—a firm credited with
launching dominant hedge funds run by commodityfocused traders including Paul Tudor Jones, Louis
Bacon, and Bruce Kovner—also passed on backing
Simons’s fund.
“The view from the industry was—‘It’s a bunch of
mathematicians using computers. . . . What do they
know about the business?’” says a friend of Simons.
“They had no track record . . . the risk was they were
going to put themselves out of business.”
Simons still had his trading system, now managing a
bit more than $70 million after a gain of 39 percent in
1991. If Simons could figure out a way to extend his
winning streak, or even improve Medallion’s returns, he
was sure investors would eventually come around.
Berlekamp, Ax, and Baum were long gone, though.

Straus was in charge of the firm’s trading, data
collection, and more, but he wasn’t a researcher capable
of uncovering hidden trading signals. With competition
growing, Medallion would have to discover new ways to
profit. Seeking help, Simons turned to Henry Laufer, a
mathematician who already had demonstrated a flair for
creative solutions.

=
Laufer never claimed any of the prestigious mathematics
awards given to Simons and Ax, nor did he have a
popular algorithm named after him, like Lenny Baum or
Elwyn Berlekamp. Nonetheless, Laufer had scaled his
own heights of accomplishment and recognition, and he
would prove Simons’s best partner yet.
Laufer had finished his undergraduate work at the
City College of New York and graduate school at
Princeton University in two years each, earning acclaim
for progress he’d made on a stubborn problem in a field
of mathematics dealing with functions of complex
variables and for discovering new examples of
embeddings, or structures within other math structures.
Joining Stony Brook’s math department in 1971,
Laufer focused on complex variables and algebraic
geometry, veering away from classical areas of complex
analysis to develop insights into more contemporary
problems. Laufer came alive in the classroom and was
popular with students, but he was more timid in his
personal life. High school friends remember a bookish
introvert who carried a slide rule. Early on at Stony
Brook, Laufer told colleagues he wanted to get married
and was eager to put himself in the best position to find
the right woman. Once, on a ski trip with fellow
mathematician Leonard Charlap, Laufer suggested they
go down to the hotel’s bar “to meet some girls.”
Charlap looked at his friend and just laughed.

“Henry, you’re not that kind of guy,” Charlap said,
knowing Laufer would be too shy to hit on women in a
hotel bar.
“He was a nice Jewish boy,” Charlap recalls.
Laufer eventually met and married Marsha Zlatin, a
speech-language pathology professor at Stony Brook who
shared Laufer’s liberal politics. Marsha had a more
upbeat personality, often using the word “swell” to
describe her mood, no matter the challenge. After
suffering a series of miscarriages, Marsha amazed
friends with her buoyancy, eventually giving birth to
healthy children. Later, she earned a PhD in speechlanguage pathology.
Marsha’s outlook on life seemed to influence Laufer.
Among colleagues, he was known as a willing
collaborator. They noticed Laufer had a special interest
in investing, and they were disappointed, but not
shocked, when he rejoined Simons as a full-time
employee in 1992.
Academics who shift to trading often turn nervous
and edgy, worried about each move in the market,
concerns that hounded Baum when he joined Simons.
Laufer, then forty-six, had a different reaction—his
improved pay relieved stress he had felt about the cost of
his daughters’ college education, friends say, and Laufer
seemed to relish the intellectual challenge of crafting
profitable trading formulas.
For Simons, Laufer’s geniality was a welcome relief
after years of dealing with the complicated personalities
of Baum, Ax, and Berlekamp. Simons became
Renaissance’s big-picture guy, wooing investors,
attracting talent, planning for emergencies, and mapping
a strategy for how his team—with Laufer leading
research in a new Stony Brook office, and Straus running
trading in Berkeley—might build on the recent strong
returns.

Laufer made an early decision that would prove
extraordinarily valuable: Medallion would employ a
single trading model rather than maintain various
models for different investments and market conditions,
a style most quantitative firms would embrace. A
collection of trading models was simpler and easier to
pull off, Laufer acknowledged. But, he argued, a single
model could draw on Straus’s vast trove of pricing data,
detecting correlations, opportunities, and other signals
across various asset classes. Narrow, individual models,
by contrast, can suffer from too little data.
Just as important, Laufer understood that a single,
stable model based on some core assumptions about how
prices and markets behave would make it easier to add
new investments later on. They could even toss
investments with relatively little trading data into the
mix if they were deemed similar to other investments
Medallion traded with lots of data. Yes, Laufer
acknowledged, it’s a challenge to combine various
investments, say a currency-futures contract and a US
commodity contract. But, he argued, once they figured
out ways to “smooth” out those wrinkles, the single
model would lead to better trading results.
Laufer spent long hours at his desk refining the
model. At lunchtime, the team usually piled into Laufer’s
aging Lincoln Town Car and headed to a local joint,
where the deliberations continued. It didn’t take long to
come up with a new way to look at the market.
Straus and others had compiled reams of files
tracking decades of prices of dozens of commodities,
bonds, and currencies. To make it all easier to digest,
they had broken the trading week into ten segments—
five overnight sessions, when stocks traded in overseas
markets, and five day sessions. In effect, they sliced the
day in half, enabling the team to search for repeating
patterns and sequences in the various segments. Then,

they entered trades in the morning, at noon, and at the
end of the day.
Simons wondered if there might be a better way to
parse their data trove. Perhaps breaking the day up into
finer segments might enable the team to dissect intraday
pricing information and unearth new, undetected
patterns. Laufer began splitting the day in half, then into
quarters, eventually deciding five-minute bars were the
ideal way to carve things up. Crucially, Straus now had
access to improved computer-processing power, making
it easier for Laufer to compare small slices of historic
data. Did the 188th five-minute bar in the cocoa-futures
market regularly fall on days investors got nervous, while
bar 199 usually rebounded? Perhaps bar 50 in the gold
market saw strong buying on days investors worried
about inflation but bar 63 often showed weakness?
Laufer’s five-minute bars gave the team the ability to
identify new trends, oddities, and other phenomena, or,
in their parlance, nonrandom trading effects. Straus and
others conducted tests to ensure they hadn’t mined so
deeply into their data that they had arrived at bogus
trading strategies, but many of the new signals seemed to
hold up.
It was as if the Medallion team had donned glasses
for the first time, seeing the market anew. One early
discovery: Certain trading bands from Friday morning’s
action had the uncanny ability to predict bands later that
same afternoon, nearer to the close of trading. Laufer’s
work also showed that, if markets moved higher late in a
day, it often paid to buy futures contracts just before the
close of trading and dump them at the market’s opening
the next day.
The team uncovered predictive effects related to
volatility, as well as a series of combination effects, such
as the propensity of pairs of investments—such as gold
and silver, or heating oil and crude oil—to move in the
same direction at certain times in the trading day

compared with others. It wasn’t immediately obvious
why some of the new trading signals worked, but as long
as they had p-values, or probability values, under 0.01—
meaning they appeared statistically significant, with a
low probability of being statistical mirages—they were
added to the system.
Wielding an array of profitable investing ideas wasn’t
nearly enough, Simons soon realized.
“How do we pull the trigger?” he asked Laufer and
the rest of the team.
Simons was challenging them to solve yet another
vexing problem: Given the range of possible trades they
had developed and the limited amount of money that
Medallion managed, how much should they bet on each
trade? And which moves should they pursue and
prioritize? Laufer began developing a computer program
to identify optimal trades throughout the day, something
Simons began calling his betting algorithm. Laufer
decided it would be “dynamic,” adapting on its own
along the way and relying on real-time analysis to adjust
the fund’s mix of holdings given the probabilities of
future market moves—an early form of machine
learning.
Driving to Stony Brook with a friend and Medallion
investor, Simons could hardly contain his excitement.
“Our system is a living thing; it’s always modifying,”
he said. “We really should be able to grow it.”
With only a dozen or so employees, Simons had to
build a full staff if he wanted to catch up to D. E. Shaw
and take on the industry’s trading powers. One day, a
Stony Brook PhD student named Kresimir Penavic drove
over for a job interview. As he waited to speak with
Laufer, Simons, wearing torn pants and penny loafers, a
cigarette dangling between two fingers, wandered over to
assess his new recruit.

“You’re at Stony Brook?” he asked Penavic, who
nodded. “What have you done?”
Unsure who the guy with all the questions was,
Penavic, who stood six-foot-six, began describing his
undergraduate work in applied mathematics.
Simons was unimpressed.
“That’s trivial stuff,” he sniffed. It was the most
devastating put-down a mathematician could deliver.
Undeterred, Penavic told Simons about another
paper he’d written focused on an unsolved algebraic
problem.
“That problem is not trivial,” Penavic insisted.
“That’s still trivial,” Simons said with a wave of his
hand, cigarette fumes wafting past Penavic’s face.
As the young recruit burned, Simons started
grinning, as if he had been playing a practical joke on
Penavic.
“I like you, though,” Simons said.
A bit later, Penavic was hired.
Around the same time, a researcher named Nick
Patterson was added to the staff—though he didn’t
exactly celebrate his job offer. Patterson couldn’t shake
his suspicion that Simons was running some kind of
scam. It wasn’t just that, in 1992, Medallion was enjoying
a third straight year of annual returns topping 33
percent, as Laufer’s short-term tactics paid off. Nor was
it the enormous fees the fund charged clients or the $100
million it supposedly managed. It was the way Simons
was racking up the alleged profits, relying on a computer
model that he and his employees themselves didn’t fully
understand.
Even the office itself didn’t seem entirely legitimate
to Patterson. Simons had moved Renaissance’s research
operation into the top floor of a nineteenth-century

home on tree-lined North Country Road in a residential
area of Stony Brook. There were nine people crammed
into the house, all working on various businesses backed
by Simons, including some venture-capital investments
and a couple of guys downstairs trading stocks. No one
knew much about what anyone else was doing, and
Simons didn’t even come in every day.
The space was so tight, Patterson didn’t have a
proper place to sit. Eventually, he pushed a chair and
desk into an empty corner of Simons’s own office.
Simons spent half the week in a New York City office and
told Patterson he didn’t mind sharing.
Patterson was well aware of Simons’s
accomplishments in mathematics and code-breaking,
but they did little to allay his suspicions.
“Mathematicians can be crooks, too,” Patterson says.
“It’s quite easy to launder money in hedge funds.”
For a full month, Patterson surreptitiously jotted
down the closing prices that Medallion used for various
investments in its portfolio, carefully checking them
against pages of the Wall Street Journal, line by line, to
see if they matched.*
Only after Simons’s numbers checked out did a
relieved Patterson turn his full attention to using his
mathematical skills to help the effort. It had taken
Patterson years to realize that he actually enjoyed math.
Early in his life, math was just a tool for Patterson, one
he used for protection. Patterson suffered from facial
dysplasia, a rare congenital disorder that distorted the
left side of his face and rendered his left eye blind.1 An
only child who grew up in the Bayswater section of
central London, Patterson was sent to Catholic boarding
school and bullied unmercifully. Unable to speak with
his parents more than once a week, and determined to
maintain a stiff British upper lip, Patterson turned his
prowess in the classroom into an advantage.

“I evolved into the school brain, a British stock
character,” Patterson recalls. “I was seen as odd but
useful, so they left me alone.”
Patterson was mostly attracted to mathematics
because he was über-competitive, and it was gratifying to
discover a field he could dominate. Only at the age of
sixteen did Patterson notice he actually enjoyed the
subject. A few years later, after graduating from the
University of Cambridge, Patterson took a job that
required him to write commercial code. He proved a
natural, gaining an advantage over fellow
mathematicians, few of whom knew how to program
computers.
A strong chess player, Patterson spent much of his
free time at a London coffee shop that rented chess
boards and hosted intense matches between customers.
Patterson regularly trounced players many years his
senior. After a while, he deduced the shop was no more
than a front—there was a secret staircase leading to an
illegal, high-stakes poker game run by a local thug.
Patterson gained entrance to the game and it quickly
became clear he was a stud at poker as well, pocketing
fistfuls of cash. The tough guy took notice of Patterson’s
abilities, making him an offer he figured Patterson
couldn’t refuse: If you hustle chess downstairs for me, I’ll
share your winnings and handle all your losses.
There was no risk to Patterson, but he rejected the
offer, nonetheless. The brute told him he was making a
big mistake.
“Are you nuts? You can’t make any money in
mathematics,” he sneered.
The experience taught Patterson to distrust most
moneymaking operations, even those that appeared
legitimate—one reason why he was so skeptical of
Simons years later.

After graduate school, Patterson thrived as a
cryptologist for the British government, building
statistical models to unscramble intercepted messages
and encrypt secret messages in a unit made famous
during World War II when Alan Turing famously broke
Germany’s encryption codes. Patterson harnessed the
simple-yet-profound Bayes’ theorem of probability,
which argues that, by updating one’s initial beliefs with
new, objective information, one can arrive at improved
understandings.
Patterson solved a long-standing problem in the
field, deciphering a pattern in the data others had
missed, becoming so valuable to the government that
some top-secret documents shared with allies were
labeled “For US Eyes Only and for Nick Patterson.”
“It was James Bond stuff,” he says.
Several years later, when a new pay scale was
instituted that elevated the group’s administrators above
the cryptologists, Patterson became livid.
“It was the insult, not the money,” says Patterson,
who told his wife he’d rather drive a bus than remain in
the group. “I had to get out of there.”
Patterson moved to the Institute for Defense
Analyses, where he met Simons and Baum, but he turned
nervous as he approached his fiftieth birthday.
“My father had a hard time in his late fifties, and that
worried me,” recalls Patterson, who had two children at
the time who were preparing to go to college. “I didn’t
have enough money, and I didn’t want to go down that
road.”
When a senior colleague received permission to
travel to Russia for an amateur-radio conference,
Patterson realized the Cold War was ending, and he had
to act fast.
I’m going to lose my job!

Fortuitously, Simons soon called, out of the blue,
sounding urgent.
“We need to talk,” Simons said. “Will you work for
me?”
A move to Renaissance made sense to Patterson.
Simons’s group was analyzing large amounts of messy,
complicated pricing data to predict future prices.
Patterson thought his natural skepticism could prove
valuable discerning true signals from random market
fluctuations. He also knew his programming skills would
come in handy. And, unlike many of Renaissance’s dozen
or so employees, Patterson actually read the business
pages, at least occasionally, and knew a bit about finance.
“I thought I was pretty cutting-edge because I owned
an index fund,” he says.
Patterson saw the world “becoming extremely
mathematical” and knew computer firepower was
expanding exponentially. He sensed Simons had an
opportunity to revolutionize investing by applying highlevel math and statistics.
“Fifty years earlier, we couldn’t have done anything,
but this was the perfect time,” he says.
After lugging a computer into the corner of Simons’s
office and concluding that Renaissance likely wasn’t a
fraud, Patterson began helping Laufer with a stubborn
problem. Profitable trade ideas are only half the game;
the act of buying and selling investments can itself affect
prices to such a degree that gains can be whittled away.
It’s meaningless to know that copper prices will rise from
$3.00 a contract to $3.10, for example, if your buying
pushes the price up to $3.05 before you even have a
chance to complete your transaction—perhaps as dealers
hike the price or as rivals do their own buying—slashing
potential profits by half.

From the earliest days of the fund, Simons’s team
had been wary of these transaction costs, which they
called slippage. They regularly compared their trades
against a model that tracked how much the firm would
have profited or lost were it not for those bothersome
trading costs. The group coined a name for the difference
between the prices they were getting and the theoretical
trades their model made without the pesky costs. They
called it The Devil.
For a while, the actual size of The Devil was
something of a guess. But, as Straus collected more data
and his computers became more powerful, Laufer and
Patterson began writing a computer program to track
how far their trades strayed from the ideal state, in which
trading costs barely weighed on the fund’s performance.
By the time Patterson got to Renaissance, the firm could
run a simulator that subtracted these trading costs from
the prices they had received, instantly isolating how
much they were missing out.
To narrow the gap, Laufer and Patterson began
developing sophisticated approaches to direct trades to
various futures exchanges to reduce the market impact of
each trade. Now Medallion could better determine which
investments to pursue, a huge advantage as it began
trading new markets and investments. They added
German, British, and Italian bonds, then interest-rate
contracts in London, and, later, futures on Nikkei Stock
Average, Japanese government bonds, and more.
The fund began trading more frequently. Having first
sent orders to a team of traders five times a day, it
eventually increased to sixteen times a day, reducing the
impact on prices by focusing on the periods when there
was the most volume. Medallion’s traders still had to
pick up the phone to transact, but the fund was on its
way toward faster trading.

=

Until then, Simons and his colleagues hadn’t spent too
much time wondering why their growing collection of
algorithms predicted prices so presciently. They were
scientists and mathematicians, not analysts or
economists. If certain signals produced results that were
statistically significant, that was enough to include them
in the trading model.
“I don’t know why planets orbit the sun,” Simons
told a colleague, suggesting one needn’t spend too much
time figuring out why the market’s patterns existed.
“That doesn’t mean I can’t predict them.”
Still, the returns were piling up so fast, it was getting
a bit absurd. Medallion soared over 25 percent just in
June 1994, on its way to a 71 percent surge that year,
results that even Simons described as “simply
remarkable.” Even more impressive: The gains came in a
year the Federal Reserve surprised investors by hiking
interest rates repeatedly, leading to deep losses for many
investors.
The Renaissance team was curious by nature, as were
many of its investors. They couldn’t help wonder what
the heck was going on. If Medallion was emerging as a
big winner in most of its trades, who was on the other
side suffering steady losses?
Over time, Simons came to the conclusion that the
losers probably weren’t those who trade infrequently,
such as buy-and-hold individual investors, or even the
“treasurer of a multinational corporation,” who adjusts
her portfolio of foreign currencies every once in a while
to suit her company’s needs, as Simons told his
investors.
Instead, it seemed Renaissance was exploiting the
foibles and faults of fellow speculators, both big and
small.
“The manager of a global hedge fund who is guessing
on a frequent basis the direction of the French bond

market may be a more exploitable participant,” Simons
said.
Laufer had a slightly different explanation for their
heady returns. When Patterson came to him, curious
about the source of the money they were raking in,
Laufer pointed to a different set of traders infamous for
both their excessive trading and overconfidence when it
came to predicting the direction of the market.
“It’s a lot of dentists,” Laufer said.
Laufer’s explanation sounds glib, but his perspective,
as well as Simons’s viewpoint, can be seen as profound,
even radical. At the time, most academics were
convinced markets were inherently efficient, suggesting
that there were no predictable ways to beat the market’s
return, and that the financial decision-making of
individuals was largely rational. Simons and his
colleagues sensed the professors were wrong. They
believed investors are prone to cognitive biases, the
kinds that lead to panics, bubbles, booms, and busts.
Simons didn’t realize it, but a new strain of
economics was emerging that would validate his
instincts. In the 1970s, Israeli psychologists Amos
Tversky and Daniel Kahneman had explored how
individuals make decisions, demonstrating how prone
most are to act irrationally. Later, economist Richard
Thaler used psychological insights to explain anomalies
in investor behavior, spurring the growth of the field of
behavioral economics, which explored the cognitive
biases of individuals and investors. Among those
identified: loss aversion, or how investors generally feel
the pain from losses twice as much as the pleasure from
gains; anchoring, the way judgment is skewed by an
initial piece of information or experience; and the
endowment effect, how investors assign excessive value
to what they already own in their portfolios.

Kahneman and Thaler would win Nobel Prizes for
their work. A consensus would emerge that investors act
more irrationally than assumed, repeatedly making
similar mistakes. Investors overreact to stress and make
emotional decisions. Indeed, it’s likely no coincidence
that Medallion found itself making its largest profits
during times of extreme turbulence in financial markets,
a phenomenon that would continue for decades to come.
Like most investors, Simons, too, became nervous
when his fund went through rocky times. In a few rare
circumstances, he reacted by paring the firm’s overall
positions. On the whole, though, Simons maintained
faith in his trading model, recalling how difficult it had
been for him to invest using his instincts. He made a
commitment to refrain from overriding the model,
hoping to ensure that neither Medallion’s returns, nor
the emotions of his employees at Renaissance,
influenced the fund’s moves.
“Our P&L isn’t an input,” Patterson says, using
trading lingo for profits and losses. “We’re mediocre
traders, but our system never has rows with its
girlfriends—that’s the kind of thing that causes patterns
in markets.”
Simons hadn’t embraced a statistics-based approach
because of the work of any economists or psychologists,
nor had he set out to program algorithms to avoid, or
take advantage of, investors’ biases. Over time, though,
Simons and his team came to believe that these errors
and overreactions were at least partially responsible for
their profits, and that their developing system seemed
uniquely capable of taking advantage of the common
mistakes of fellow traders.
“What you’re really modeling is human behavior,”
explains Penavic, the researcher. “Humans are most
predictable in times of high stress—they act instinctively
and panic. Our entire premise was that human actors

will react the way humans did in the past . . . we learned
to take advantage.”

=
Investors finally began taking note of Medallion’s gains.
A year earlier, in 1993, GAM Holding—a London-based
investment firm managing money for wealthy clients
that was one of the first institutions to invest in hedge
funds—had given Renaissance about $25 million. By
then, Simons and his team had turned wary of sharing
much of anything about how their fund operated, lest
rivals catch on. That put GAM executives, accustomed to
fully understanding details of how funds operated, in a
difficult position. They’d confirm that Renaissance had
proper audits, and that their investors’ money was
secure, but GAM couldn’t fully understand how
Medallion was making so much money. The GAM brass
were thrilled with the results of Simons’s fund, but, like
other clients, perpetually anxious about their
investment.
“I always lived scared, worried something would go
wrong,” says David McCarthy, who was in charge of
monitoring GAM’s investment in Medallion.
Soon, Simons’s challenges would become apparent.

=
Simons did an about-face. By the end of 1993, Medallion
managed $280 million, and Simons worried profits
might suffer if the fund got too big and its trades started
pushing prices higher when it bought, or lower when it
sold. Simons decided not to let any more clients into the
fund.
Simons’s team turned more secretive, telling clients
to dial a Manhattan phone number for a recording of
recent results and to speak with Renaissance’s lawyers if

they needed detailed updates. The additional steps were
to keep rivals from learning about the fund’s activities.
“Our very good results have made us well known,
and this may be our most serious challenge,” Simons
wrote in a letter to clients. “Visibility invites competition,
and, with all due respect to the principles of free
enterprise—the less the better.”
Simons pressured his investors not to share any
details of the operation.
“Our only defense is to keep a low profile,” he told
them.
The secretive approach sometimes hurt the firm. In
the winter of 1995, a scientist at Brookhaven National
Laboratory’s Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider named
Michael Botlo received a call from a Renaissance
executive asking if he’d be interested in a job.
Fighting a snowstorm, Botlo drove his dented Mazda
hatchback to Renaissance’s new offices located in a hightech incubator close to a hospital and a dive bar near
Stony Brook’s campus. Botlo entered the office, brushed
off the snow, and was immediately underwhelmed by the
small, tacky, beige-and-teal offices. When Botlo sat down
to speak with Patterson and other staff members, they
wouldn’t share even bare details of their trading
approach, focusing instead on the inclement weather,
frustrating Botlo.
Enough of the chitchat, he thought.
Botlo was told Renaissance used a decade-old
computer-programming language called Perl, rather
than languages like C++ that big Wall Street trading
firms relied upon, making him even more skeptical. (In
reality, Renaissance employed Perl for bookkeeping and
other operations, not its trading, but no one wanted to
share that information with a visitor.)

“It looked like four guys in a garage. They didn’t
seem that skilled at computer science, and a lot of what
they were doing seemed by the seat of their pants, a few
guys dabbling at computing,” Botlo says. ”It wasn’t very
appealing.”
Days later, Botlo wrote Patterson a note: “I’ve chosen
to learn the business properly by joining Morgan
Stanley.”
Ouch.
In 1995, Simons received a call from a representative
of PaineWebber, a major brokerage firm, expressing
interest in an acquisition of Renaissance. Finally, after
years of hard work and outsize gains, Wall Street’s big
boys had taken notice of Simons’s pioneering methods. A
huge payday surely was in the offing.
Simons appointed Patterson to meet with a few
PaineWebber executives, but it didn’t take him long to
realize the brokerage firm wasn’t convinced of Simons’s
revolutionary strategies or interested in his acclaimed
staffers. The PaineWebber executives were simply after
the hedge fund’s client list, astonished by the enormous
fees they were paying to invest with Simons. After getting
their hands on Renaissance’s customers, PaineWebber
would likely gut the firm and try to sell its own products
to Renaissance’s well-heeled clientele. The talks went
nowhere, disappointing some at Renaissance. The
mainstream still didn’t trust computer trading; it just felt
wrong and risky.
“They assumed the algorithms were basically
nonsense,” Patterson says.

=
Medallion was still on a winning streak. It was scoring
big profits trading futures contracts and managed $600
million, but Simons was convinced the hedge fund was in

a serious bind. Laufer’s models, which measured the
fund’s impact on the market with surprising precision,
concluded that Medallion’s returns would wane if it
managed much more money. Some commodity markets,
such as grains, were just too small to handle additional
buying and selling by the fund without pushing prices
around. There were also limitations to how much more
Medallion could do in bigger bond and currency
markets.
Word had spread that Medallion had a knack for
profitable bets, and shady traders were taking advantage.
On a visit to Chicago, a staffer caught someone standing
above the Eurodollar-futures pits watching Medallion’s
trades. The spy would send hand signals whenever
Medallion bought or sold, enabling a confederate to get
in just before Simons’s fund took any actions, reducing
Medallion’s profits. Others seemed to have index cards
listing the times of day Medallion usually transacted.
Some on the floor had even coined a nickname for
Simons’s team: “the Sheiks,” a reflection of their
prominence in some commodity markets. Renaissance
adjusted its activity to make it more secretive and
unpredictable, but it was one more indication the firm
was outgrowing various financial markets.
Simons worried his signals were getting weaker as
rivals adopted similar strategies.
“The system is always leaking,” Simons
acknowledged in his first interview with a reporter. “We
keep having to keep it ahead of the game.”2
Some at the firm didn’t see the big deal. Okay, the
capital constraints meant Medallion never could become
the world’s largest or greatest hedge fund—so what? If
they kept the fund around its current size, they’d all
become fabulously wealthy and successful, anyway.
“Why don’t we keep it at $600 million?” Straus asked
Simons. That way, Medallion could rack up $200 million

or so in annual profits, more than enough to make its
employees happy.
“No,” Simons responded. “We can do better.”
Simons insisted on finding a way to grow the fund,
frustrating some staffers.
“Emperors want empires,” one griped to a colleague.
Robert Frey, the former Morgan Stanley quant who
was working at Kepler, the separate stock-trading
venture backed by Simons, had a kinder interpretation of
Simons’s stubborn push to grow Medallion. Simons was
determined to accomplish something special, says Frey,
maybe even pioneer a new approach to trading.
“What Jim wants to do is matter,” Frey says. “He
wanted a life that meant something. . . . If he was going
to do a fund, he wanted to be the best.”
Frey has an additional theory about why Simons was
so intent on expanding the fund.
“Jim saw his chance to be a billionaire,” Frey says.
Simons had long been driven by two ever-present
motivations: proving he could solve big problems, and
making lots and lots of money. Friends never fully
understood his need to accumulate more wealth, but it
was ceaseless and ever-present.
There was only one way Simons could grow
Medallion without crippling its returns: expand into
stock investing. Because equity markets are deep and
easy to trade, even huge size wouldn’t impede profits.
The catch was that making money in equity markets had
long confounded Simons and his team. Frey was still
working on his trading strategies at Kepler, but the
results were lackluster, adding to Simons’s pressures.
Hoping to keep the fund’s performance afloat and
improve the operation’s efficiency, Simons moved to
consolidate all his operations on Long Island, uprooting

ten longtime employees in Northern California,
including Sandor Straus, who had a son in high school
and protested the move. Straus said he was unwilling to
leave for Long Island and was unhappy Simons was
forcing his California-based colleagues to transplant
their lives. Straus ran the trading operation, was the last
remaining member of the original firm, and was a key
reason for its success. Straus owned a piece of
Renaissance, and he demanded a vote of fellow
shareholders on the cross-country relocation. Straus lost,
leading to more frustration.
In 1996, Straus sold his Renaissance shares and quit,
a fresh blow for Simons. Later, Simons would force
Straus and other nonemployees to pull their money out
of Medallion. Straus could have insisted on special
treatment that might have allowed him to invest in the
fund indefinitely, but he figured he’d just invest with
funds that enjoyed similar prospects.
“I thought we were one of many,” Straus says. “If I
thought there was some secret sauce, I would have made
sure I could stay invested in Medallion.”

=
As Simons and his team struggled to find a new direction
and deal with Straus’s departure, he didn’t get much
sympathy from his old friends in mathematics. They still
didn’t get why he was devoting so much time and energy
to financial markets; all they saw was a generational
talent wasting his time on frivolity. One weekend
afternoon after Simons left Stony Brook, Dennis
Sullivan, a well-known topologist at Stony Brook, visited
Simons at home, watching as he organized a birthday
party for his son, Nathaniel, Simons’s third child with
Barbara. As Simons handed out water guns and
participated in the ensuing high jinks, Sullivan rolled his
eyes.

“It annoyed me,” Sullivan says. “Math is sacred, and
Jim was a serious mathematician who could solve the
hardest problems. . . . I was disappointed in his choices.”
Other times, Simons was seen joking around with
Nicholas, his first child with Marilyn, who was outgoing
like his father and shared his sometimes-mischievous
sense of humor.
Sullivan’s perspective slowly changed as he grew
closer with Simons, spending time at his home and
witnessing Simons’s devotion to his aging parents, who
frequently visited from Boston. Sullivan gained an
appreciation for the attention Simons gave to his
children, especially Paul, who continued to battle his
birth disorder. At seventeen, Paul had suffered an
epileptic seizure, and he subsequently began taking
medication that eliminated future attacks.
Jim and Barbara saw signs of emerging selfconfidence in their son. All his life, Paul worked to
strengthen his body, doing a series of pull-ups and pushups almost every day, while also becoming an
accomplished skier and endurance bicycle rider. A free
spirit, Paul demonstrated little interest in mathematics
or trading. As an adult, he hiked, skied, played with his
dog, Avalon, and developed a close relationship with a
local young woman. Paul especially enjoyed cycling
through tranquil, dormant land near Mill Pond in Stony
Brook, spending hours at a time on his favorite bike
route.
In September 1996, after turning thirty-four years
old, Paul donned a jersey and shorts, hopped on his
world-class bicycle, and set off on a fast ride through Old
Field Road in Setauket, near his boyhood home. Out of
nowhere, an elderly woman backed her car out of the
driveway, unaware the young man was riding past. She
hit Paul, crushing and killing him instantly, a random
and tragic accident. Several days later, the woman,

traumatized by the experience, had a heart attack and
died.
Jim and Barbara were devastated. For weeks
afterward, Simons was a shell of himself.
Simons leaned on his family for support,
withdrawing from work and other activities. Colleagues
didn’t know how Simons would cope with his pain, or
how long it would last.
“You never get over it,” Barbara says. “You just learn
to deal with it.”
When Simons eventually returned to work, his
friends sensed he needed a distraction. Simons refocused
on his team’s disappointing efforts to master stock
trading, his last chance to build his firm into a power.
For a while, it seemed Simons was wasting his time.

CHAPTER NINE
No one ever made a decision because of a
number. They need a story.
Daniel Kahneman, economist

J trade commodities, currencies, and bonds: predictive
im Simons seemed to have discovered the perfect way to

mathematical models. Yet, Simons knew, if he wanted
Renaissance Technologies to amount to much of
anything, he’d have to get his computers to make money
in stocks.
It wasn’t clear why Simons thought he had a chance
of success. The early 1990s was a golden age for
fundamental investors, those who generally chat up
companies and digest annual reports, financial filings
and statements à la Warren Buffett. These investors tap
instinct, cunning, and experience. It was all about
brainpower, not computing power. When it came to
stocks, Simons seemed well out of his depth.
Peter Lynch was a paragon of the fundamental
approach. From 1977 to 1990, Lynch’s prescient stock
picks helped Fidelity Investments’ Magellan mutual fund
grow from a $100 million pip-squeak into a $16 billion
power, averaging annual gains of 29 percent, beating the
market in eleven of those years. Ignoring historic and
overlooked pricing patterns—the stuff Simons obsessed
over—Lynch said investors could trounce the market
simply by sticking with companies they understood best.
“Know what you own” was Lynch’s mantra.
Searching for story stocks that he believed would
experience surging earnings, Lynch made a killing on
Dunkin’ Donuts, the doughnut retailer beloved in

Fidelity’s home state of Massachusetts, purchasing
shares partly because the company “didn’t have to worry
about low-priced Korean imports.” Another time,
Lynch’s wife, Carolyn, brought home a pair of L’eggs, a
brand of pantyhose that was stuffed into distinctive, eggshaped plastic containers and sold in supermarket and
drugstore checkout aisles. Carolyn loved L’eggs, so her
husband did, too, backing up the truck to buy shares of
its manufacturer, Hanes, even though most hosiery
products at the time were sold in department stores and
women’s clothing stores, not in drugstores.
“I did a little bit of research,” Lynch later explained.
“I found out the average woman goes to the supermarket
or a drugstore once a week, and they go to a woman’s
specialty store or department store once every six weeks.
And all the good hosiery, all the good pantyhose, is being
sold in department stores. They were selling junk in the
supermarkets.”
When a rival brand of pantyhose was introduced,
Lynch bought forty-eight pairs and asked employees to
test them out, determining they couldn’t match the
quality of his L’eggs. Over time, Lynch rode Hanes to a
gain of ten times his fund’s initial investment.
Lynch’s most important tool was his telephone, not
his computer. He’d regularly call, or sometimes visit, a
network of well-placed executives, asking for updates on
their businesses, competitors, suppliers, customers, and
more. These were legal tactics at the time, even though
smaller investors couldn’t access the same information.
“The computer won’t tell you [if a business trend] is
going to last a month or a year,” Lynch said.1
By 1990, one out of every one hundred Americans
was invested in Magellan, and Lynch’s book, One Up on
Wall Street, sold more than a million copies, inspiring
investors to search for stocks “from the supermarket to
the workplace.” As Fidelity came to dominate mutual

funds, it began sending young analysts to call on
hundreds of companies each year. Lynch’s successors,
including Jeffrey Vinik, used the trips to gain their own,
entirely legal, information advantage over rivals.
“Vinik would ask us to have conversations with
cabdrivers on our way from and to the airport to get a
sense of the local economy or the particular company we
were visiting,” recalls J. Dennis Jean-Jacques, who was a
Fidelity analyst at the time. “We would also eat in the
company cafeteria . . . or at a nearby restaurant, so we
could ask the waiter questions about the company across
the street.”
As Lynch and Vinik racked up big gains in Boston,
Bill Gross was on the other side of the country, on the
shores of Newport Beach, California, building a bond
empire at a company called Pacific Investment
Management Company, or PIMCO. Gross, who paid his
way through business school with blackjack winnings
after reading Ed Thorp’s book on gambling, was
especially adept at predicting the direction of global
interest rates. He became well known in the financial
world for thoughtful, colorful market observations, as
well as a unique look. Each day, Gross wore opencollared, custom-made dress shirts with a tie draped
loosely around his neck, a style adopted after vigorous
exercise and yoga sessions left him overheated and
unwilling to knot his tie once in the office.
Like Simons, Gross used a mathematical approach to
dissect his investments, though Gross melded his
formulas with a heavy dose of intuition and intelligence.
Gross emerged as a true market savant in 1995, after a
huge wager on falling interest rates generated gains of 20
percent for his bond mutual fund, which became the
largest ever of its kind. Investors crowned him “the Bond
King,” a name that would stick as Gross began an
extended reign atop debt markets.

Around the same time, so-called macro investors
grabbed headlines and instilled fear in global political
leaders with their own distinct style. Instead of placing
thousands of bets, like Simons, these traders made the
bulk of their profits from a limited number of gutsy
moves aimed at anticipating global political and
economic shifts.
Stanley Druckenmiller was one of the traders on the
ascent. A shaggy-haired Pittsburgh native who had
dropped out of a PhD program in economics,
Druckenmiller was a top-performing mutual-fund
manager before taking over George Soros’s billion-dollar
hedge fund, the Quantum Fund. Thirty-five years old at
the time, Druckenmiller arrived at his investment
decisions after scrutinizing news and studying economic
statistics and other information, aiming to place his
trades well ahead of big global events.
It only took six months for Soros to regret hiring
Druckenmiller. As Druckenmiller flew to Pittsburgh,
Soros dumped his bond positions without even a
warning, worried they were losers. Apprised of the move
after landing, Druckenmiller found a nearby pay phone
and called in his resignation.2
A bit later, back in the office, nerves calmed and
apologies issued, Soros said he was departing for a sixmonth trip to Europe, a separation period to see if
Druckenmiller’s early losing streak was due to “us having
too many cooks in the kitchen, or whether you’re just
inept.”
Months later, the Berlin Wall dividing West Germany
and East Germany was opened and eventually toppled.
The world cheered, but investors worried the West
German economy and its currency, the deutsche mark,
would be crippled by a merger with much-poorer East
Germany. That view didn’t make much sense to
Druckenmiller; an influx of cheap labor seemed likely to
bolster the German economy, not hurt it, and the

German central bank could be expected to bolster its
currency to keep inflation at bay.
“I had a very strong belief that the Germans were
obsessed with inflation,” Druckenmiller recalls, noting
that surging inflation after World War I had paved the
way for the rise of Adolf Hitler. “There was no way they
would let the currency go down.”
With Soros out of the way, Druckenmiller placed a
huge bet on deutsche marks, resulting in a gain of nearly
30 percent for the Quantum Fund in 1990. Two years
later, with Soros back in New York and relations
improved between the two men, Druckenmiller walked
into Soros’s expansive midtown office to share his next
big move: slowly expanding an existing wager against the
British pound. Druckenmiller told Soros authorities in
the country were bound to break from the European
Exchange Rate Mechanism and allow the pound to fall in
value, helping Britain emerge from recession. His stance
was unpopular, Druckenmiller acknowledged, but he
professed confidence the scenario would unfold.
Complete silence from Soros. Then, an expression of
bewilderment.
Soros gave a look “like I was a moron,”
Druckenmiller recalls.
“That doesn’t make sense,” Soros told him.
Before Druckenmiller had a chance to defend his
thesis, Soros cut him off.
“Trades like this only happen every twenty years or
so,” Soros said.
He was imploring Druckenmiller to expand his bet.
The Quantum Fund sold short about $10 billion of
the British currency. Rivals, learning what was
happening or arriving at similar conclusions, were soon
doing the same, pushing the pound lower while exerting
pressure on British authorities. On September 16, 1992,

the government abandoned its efforts to prop up the
pound, devaluing the currency by 20 percent, earning
Druckenmiller and Soros more than $1 billion in just
twenty-four hours. The fund gained over 60 percent in
1993 and soon controlled over $8 billion of cash from
investors, dwarfing anything Simons dreamed of
managing. For more than a decade, the trade would be
considered the greatest ever, a testament to how much
can be made with heavy doses of savvy and moxie.
It was self-evident that the surest way to score huge
sums in the market was by unearthing corporate
information and analyzing economic trends. The idea
that someone could use computers to beat these
seasoned pros seemed far-fetched.
Jim Simons, still struggling to make money trading
stocks, didn’t need any reminder. Kepler Financial, the
company launched by former Morgan Stanley math and
computer specialist Robert Frey that Simons had backed,
was just plodding along. The firm was improving on the
statistical-arbitrage strategies Frey and others had
employed at Morgan Stanley by identifying a small set of
market-wide factors that best explained stock moves.
The trajectory of United Airlines shares, for example, is
determined by the stock’s sensitivity to the returns of the
overall market, changes in the price of oil, the movement
of interest rates, and other factors. The direction of
another stock, like Walmart, is influenced by the same
explanatory factors, though the retail giant likely has a
very different sensitivity to each of them.
Kepler’s twist was to apply this approach to
statistical arbitrage, buying stocks that didn’t rise as
much as expected based on the historic returns of these
various underlying factors, while simultaneously selling
short, or wagering against, shares that underperformed.
If shares of Apple Computer and Starbucks each rose 10
percent amid a market rally, but Apple historically did
much better than Starbucks during bullish periods,

Kepler might buy Apple and short Starbucks. Using
time-series analysis and other statistical techniques, Frey
and a colleague searched for trading errors, behavior
not fully explained by historic data tracking the key
factors, on the assumption that these deviations likely
would disappear over time.
Betting on relationships and relative differences
between groups of stocks, rather than an outright rise or
fall of shares, meant Frey didn’t need to predict where
shares were headed, a difficult task for anyone. He and
his colleagues also didn’t really care where the overall
market was going. As a result, Kepler’s portfolio was
market neutral, or reasonably immune to the stock
market’s moves. Frey’s models usually just focused on
whether relationships between clusters of stocks
returned to their historic norms—a reversion-to-themean strategy. Constructing a portfolio of these
investments figured to dampen the fund’s volatility,
giving it a high Sharpe ratio. Named after economist
William F. Sharpe, the Sharpe ratio is a commonly used
measure of returns that incorporates a portfolio’s risk. A
high Sharpe suggests a strong and stable historic
performance.
Kepler’s hedge fund, eventually renamed Nova,
generated middling results that frustrated clients, a few
of whom bolted. The fund was subsumed into Medallion
while Frey continued his efforts, usually without
tremendous success.
The problem wasn’t that Frey’s system couldn’t
discover profitable strategies. It was unusually good at
identifying profitable trades and forecasting the
movement of groups of shares. It was that, too often, the
team’s profits paled in comparison to those predicted by
their model. Frey was like a chef with a delicious recipe
who cooked a series of memorable meals but dropped
most of them on the way to the dinner table.

Watching Frey and his colleagues flail, some
Renaissance staffers began to lose patience. Laufer,
Patterson, and the others had developed a sophisticated
system to buy and sell various commodities and other
investments, featuring a betting algorithm that adjusted
its holdings given the range of probabilities of future
market moves. Frey’s team had nothing of the sort for
stocks. Staffers carped that his trading model seemed
much too sensitive to tiny market fluctuations. It
sometimes bought shares and sold them before they had
a chance to rise, spooked by a sudden move in price.
There was too much noise in the market for Frey’s
system to hear any of its signals.
It would take two oddballs to help solve the problem
for Simons. One rarely talked. The other could barely sit
still.

=
As Nick Patterson worked with Henry Laufer in the early
1990s to improve Medallion’s predictive models, he
began a side job he seemed to relish as much as
discovering overlooked price trends: recruiting talent for
Renaissance’s growing staff. To upgrade the firm’s
computer systems, for example, Patterson helped hire
Jacqueline Rosinsky as the first systems administrator.
Rosinsky, whose husband ditched an accounting career
to become a captain in the New York City Fire
Department, would eventually head information
technology and other areas. (Later, women would
manage legal and other departments, but it would be a
while before they’d play significant roles on the research,
data, or trading sides of the operation.*) Patterson
required a few things from his hires. They needed to be
supersmart, of course, with identifiable
accomplishments, such as academic papers or awards,
ideally in fields lending themselves to the work
Renaissance was doing. Patterson steered clear of Wall

Street types. He didn’t have anything against them, per
se; he just was convinced he could find more impressive
talent elsewhere.
“We can teach you about money,” Patterson explains.
“We can’t teach you about smart.”
Besides, Patterson argued to a colleague, if someone
left a bank or hedge fund to join Renaissance, they’d be
more inclined to bolt at some point for a rival, if the
opportunity ever arose, than someone without a
familiarity with the investment community. That was
crucial, because Simons insisted that everyone at the
firm actively share their work with each other. Simons
needed to trust that his staffers weren’t going to take that
information and run off to a competitor.
One last thing got Patterson especially excited: if a
potential recruit was miserable in their current job.
“I liked smart people who were probably unhappy,”
Patterson says.
One day, after reading in the morning paper that
IBM was slashing costs, Patterson became intrigued. He
was aware of the accomplishments of the computer
giant’s speech-recognition group and thought their work
bore similarity to what Renaissance was doing. In early
1993, Patterson sent separate letters to Peter Brown and
Robert Mercer, deputies of the group, inviting them to
visit Renaissance’s offices to discuss potential positions.
Brown and Mercer both reacted the exact same way
—depositing Patterson’s letter in the closest trash
receptacle. They’d reconsider after experiencing family
upheaval, laying the groundwork for dramatic change at
Jim Simons’s company, and the world as a whole.

=
Robert Mercer’s lifelong passion had been sparked by his
father.

A brilliant scientist with a dry wit, Thomas Mercer
was born in Victoria, British Columbia, later becoming a
world expert on aerosols, the tiny particles suspended in
the atmosphere that both contribute to air pollution and
cool the earth by blocking the sun. Thomas spent more
than a decade as a professor of radiation biology and
biophysics at the University of Rochester before
becoming department head of a foundation devoted to
curing respiratory disease in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
It was there that Robert, the eldest of Thomas’s three
children, was born in 1946.
His mother, Virginia Mercer, was passionate about
the theater and arts, but Robert was riveted by
computers. It began the very moment Thomas showed
Robert the magnetic drum and punch cards of an IBM
650, one of the earliest mass-produced computers. After
Thomas explained the computer’s inner workings to his
son, the ten-year-old began creating his own programs,
filling up an oversize notebook. Bob carried that
notebook around for years before he ever had access to
an actual computer.
At Sandia High School and the University of New
Mexico, Mercer was a bespectacled, lanky, and low-key
member of the school’s chess, auto, and Russian clubs.
He came alive for math, though, sharing a proud,
handsome smile in a photo appearing in the
Albuquerque Journal after he and two classmates won
top honors in a national mathematics contest in 1964.3
After high school graduation, Mercer spent three
weeks at the National Youth Science Camp in the
mountains of West Virginia. There, Mercer discovered a
single computer, a donated IBM 1620, that could do fifty
ten-digit multiplications a second but was neglected by
most campers. Apparently, sitting indoors all day in the
summer wasn’t as enticing to them as it was to Mercer,
so he got to play with the computer as much as he
wanted, learning to program in Fortran, a language

developed mainly for scientists. That summer, Neil
Armstrong paid a visit to the camp, five years prior to
becoming the first man to set foot on the moon. He told
the campers that astronauts were using the latest
computer technology, some of it the size of a match.
Mercer sat listening, mouth agape.
“I couldn’t see how that would even be possible,” he
later recalled.
While studying physics, chemistry, and mathematics
at the University of New Mexico, Mercer got a job at a
weapons laboratory at the Kirtland Air Force Base eight
miles away, just so he could help program the base’s
supercomputer. Much as baseball players appreciate the
smell of fresh-cut outfield grass or the site of a wellgroomed pitcher’s mound, Mercer came to delight in the
sights and smells of Kirtland’s computer lab.
“I loved everything about computers,” Mercer later
explained. “I loved the solitude of the computer lab late
at night. I loved the air-conditioned smell of the place. I
loved the sound of the discs whirring, and the printers
clacking.”
It might seem a bit unusual, even odd, for a young
man to be so enthralled by a computer laboratory, but, in
the mid-1960s, these machines came to represent
unexplored terrain and fresh possibility. A subculture
developed of young computer specialists, academics and
hobbyists who stayed up late into the night coding, or
writing instructions so computers could solve problems
or execute specified, automated tasks. The instructions
were given using algorithms, which entailed a series of
logical, step-by-step procedures.
Bright young men and women, the programmers
were counterculture rebels, boldly exploring the future,
even as their peers chased the fleeting pleasures of the
day, forging a spirit and energy that would change the
world for decades to come.

“We suffered socially and psychologically for being
right,” says Aaron Brown, a member of the emerging
coder crew who became a senior executive of the quanttrading world.
As an inductee into the cult, Mercer spent the
summer on the lab’s mainframe computer rewriting a
program that calculated electromagnetic fields generated
by nuclear fusion bombs. In time, Mercer found ways to
make the program one hundred times faster, a real coup.
Mercer was energized and enthused, but his bosses
didn’t seem to care about his accomplishment. Instead of
running the old computations at the new, faster speed,
they instructed Mercer to run computations that were
one hundred times the size. It seemed Mercer’s revvedup speed made little difference to them, an attitude that
helped mold the young man’s worldview.
“I took this as an indication that one of the most
important goals of government-financed research is not
so much to get answers as it is to consume the computer
budget,” Mercer later said.
He turned cynical, viewing government as arrogant
and inefficient. Years later, Mercer would embrace the
view that individuals need to be self-sufficient and avoid
state aid.
The summer experience “left me, ever since, with a
jaundiced view of government-financed research,”
Mercer explained.4
After earning his PhD in computer science at the
University of Illinois, Mercer joined IBM in 1972, even
though he was dismissive of the quality of the company’s
computers. It was a different part of the company that
had impressed him. Mercer had agreed to visit the
Thomas J. Watson Research Center in the New York City
suburb of Yorktown Heights and was struck by hardcharging IBM staffers pushing to discover innovations
that could power the company’s future.

Mercer joined the team and began working in the
company’s newly formed speech-recognition group.
Eventually, he was joined by a young and outgoing
mathematician in a hurry to accomplish something big.

=
As a teenager, Peter Brown watched his father deal with
a series of daunting business challenges. In 1972, when
Peter was seventeen, Henry Brown and a partner came
up with the idea of cobbling together investments from
individual investors to buy relatively safe, yet higheryielding debt, introducing the world’s first moneymarket mutual fund. Henry’s fund offered higher rates
than those available in bank savings accounts, but few
investors had even a passing interest. Peter would help
his father stuff envelopes and mail letters to hundreds of
potential customers, hoping to elicit interest in the new
fund. Henry worked every day that year except
Christmas, resorting to eating peanut-butter sandwiches
and taking out a second mortgage to fund his business,
as his wife, Betsey, worked as a family therapist.
“A combination of starvation and pure greed drove
us,” Henry explained to the Wall Street Journal.5
His lucky break came the next year in the form of a
New York Times article about the fledgling fund. Clients
began calling, and soon Henry and his partner were
managing $100 million in their Reserve Primary Fund.
The fund grew, reaching billions of dollars, but Henry
resigned, in 1985, to move with Betsey to the Brown
family’s farm in a Virginia hamlet, where he raised cattle
on five hundred acres. Henry also competed in
trebuchet, a kind of mechanical catapult, winning
competitions with a contraption that sent an eightpound pumpkin over one thousand feet. In their new
neighborhood, Betsey became a civic activist and local
Democratic politician.

Henry’s business still dominated his thoughts,
though. For more than a decade, he squabbled with his
former partner, Bruce Bent, whom Henry accused of
reneging on an agreement to buy his half-interest in the
company. Henry eventually filed a lawsuit, claiming Bent
was rewarding himself excessively while running the
fund, before the men finally worked out a deal for Brown
to sell his half-ownership to Brent in 1999. (In 2008, the
fund would lose so much money from the debt of
investment bank Lehman Brothers, among other things,
that its troubles would sow fear throughout the financial
system.)
While his family had wealth, friends say Peter
sometimes expressed anxiety about his finances, perhaps
due to his father’s early challenges or his extended battle
with his partner. Peter reserved his own ambitions for
science and math. After graduating from Harvard
University with an undergraduate degree in
mathematics, Brown joined a unit of Exxon that was
developing ways to translate spoken language into
computer text, an early form of speech-recognition
technology. Later, he’d earn a PhD in computer science
from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
In 1984, at the age of twenty-nine, Brown joined
IBM’s speech group, where Mercer and others had been
working to develop computer software to transcribe
spoken text. Conventional wisdom in the decades-old
field was that only linguists and phoneticians, teaching
computers rules of syntax and grammar, had a chance at
getting computers to recognize language.
Brown, Mercer, and their fellow mathematicians and
scientists, including the group’s hard-driving leader,
Fred Jelinek, viewed language very differently from the
traditionalists. To them, language could be modeled like
a game of chance. At any point in a sentence, there exists
a certain probability of what might come next, which can
be estimated based on past, common usage. “Pie” is

more likely to follow the word “apple” in a sentence than
words like “him” or “the,” for example. Similar
probabilities also exist for pronunciation, the IBM crew
argued.
Their goal was to feed their computers with enough
data of recorded speech and written text to develop a
probabilistic, statistical model capable of predicting
likely word sequences based on sequences of sounds.
Their computer code wouldn’t necessarily understand
what it was transcribing, but it would learn to transcribe
language, nonetheless.
In mathematical terms, Brown, Mercer, and the rest
of Jelinek’s team viewed sounds as the output of a
sequence in which each step along the way is random, yet
dependent on the previous step—a hidden Markov
model. A speech-recognition system’s job was to take a
set of observed sounds, crunch the probabilities, and
make the best possible guess about the “hidden”
sequences of words that could have generated those
sounds. To do that, the IBM researchers employed the
Baum-Welch algorithm—codeveloped by Jim Simons’s
early trading partner Lenny Baum—to zero in on the
various language probabilities. Rather than manually
programming in static knowledge about how language
worked, they created a program that learned from data.
Brown, Mercer, and the others relied upon Bayesian
mathematics, which had emerged from the statistical
rule proposed by Reverend Thomas Bayes in the
eighteenth-century. Bayesians will attach a degree of
probability to every guess and update their best
estimates as they receive new information. The genius of
Bayesian statistics is that it continuously narrows a range
of possibilities. Think, for example, of a spam filter,
which doesn’t know with certainty if an email is
malicious, but can be effective by assigning odds to each
one received by constantly learning from emails
previously classified as “junk.” (This approach wasn’t as

strange as it might seem. According to linguists, people
in conversation unconsciously guess the next words that
will be spoken, updating their expectations along the
way.)
The IBM team was as unique in personality as in
method, especially Mercer. Tall and fit, Mercer jumped
rope to stay in shape. As a younger man, he had
displayed a passing resemblance to the actor Ryan
Reynolds, but that was about all Mercer had in common
with Hollywood flash. He developed a laconic, efficient
style of interaction, wasting few words and avoiding
speaking unless he deemed it necessary, a quirk some
fellow scientists appreciated. Mercer sometimes let out
an “I cracked it!” after solving a difficult computation,
but he generally was content humming or whistling to
himself all day long, usually classical music. Mercer
didn’t drink coffee, tea, or alcohol; he mostly stuck with
Coca-Cola. On the rare occasions that he became
frustrated, Mercer would yell out “bull-twaddle,” which
colleagues understood to be an amalgam of “bullshit”
and “twaddle,” or idle talk.
Mercer had such long arms that his wife sewed him
dress shirts with extended sleeves, as well as odd colors
and patterns. At a Halloween party one year, Jelinek,
who had a mean streak, came dressed as Mercer, wearing
a shirt with impossibly long sleeves. Mercer laughed
along with his colleagues.
Mercer got to the office at six o’clock in the morning
and met Brown and other colleagues for lunch at 11:15
a.m. Mercer consumed the same thing almost every day:
a peanut-butter-and-jelly or tuna sandwich packed in a
reusable Tupperware container or a used, folded brown
paper bag, which fellow researchers interpreted as a sign
of frugality. After his sandwich, Mercer would open a bag
of potato chips, lay them out on a table in order of size,
eat the broken ones first, and then the rest, smallest to
largest.

On Friday afternoons, the team met for soda, tea,
cookies, and coffee cake. As they chatted, the researchers
sometimes complained about IBM’s substandard pay.
Other times, Mercer shared sections from an
etymological dictionary he found especially amusing.
Once in a while, he’d issue statements that seemed
aimed at getting a rise out of his lunch-mates, such as the
time he declared that he thought he would live forever.
Brown was more animated, approachable, and
energetic, with thick, curly brown hair and an infectious
charm. Unlike Mercer, Brown forged friendships within
the group, several members of which appreciated his
sneaky sense of humor.
As the group struggled to make progress in naturallanguage processing, though, Brown showed impatience,
directing special ire at an intern named Phil Resnik. A
graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania who
had earned a bachelor of arts in computer science at
Harvard University and would later become a respected
academic, Resnik hoped to combine mathematical tactics
with linguistic principles. Brown had little patience for
Resnik’s approach, mocking his younger colleague and
jumping on his mistakes.
One day, as a dozen IBM staffers watched Resnik
work through an issue on an office whiteboard, Brown
ran up to him, grabbed the marker out of Resnik’s hand,
and sneered, “This is kindergarten computer science!”
Resnik sat back down, embarrassed.
Another time, Brown called Resnik “worthless” and
“a complete idiot.”
Brown developed insulting nicknames for many of
his junior colleagues, members of the group recall. He
called Meredith Goldsmith, the only woman in the
group, “Merry Death,” for example, or referred to her as
“Jennifer,” the name of a previous member of the group.
Most frequently, Brown called Goldsmith “little Miss

Meredith,” a name the recent Yale University graduate
viewed as particularly belittling.
Mercer and Brown helped mentor Goldsmith, which
she appreciated. But Mercer also shared his opinion with
her that women belonged at home, taking care of
children, not in the working world.
Brown, whose wife had been appointed head of
public health for New York City, viewed himself a
progressive. He valued Goldsmith’s contributions and
told her she was like a daughter to him. Yet, that didn’t
stop Brown from allowing inappropriate jokes to flow
amid the group’s locker-room environment.
“They told dirty jokes all the time; it was a sport,” she
recalls.
Goldsmith eventually quit, partly due to the
uncomfortable environment in the group.
“In a sense they were both nice and sexist to me,”
Goldsmith says. “I definitely felt objectified and not
taken seriously.”
Brown didn’t mean anything personal by the insults,
or at least that’s what members of the group told
themselves. And he wasn’t the only one who enjoyed
chewing out or mocking others. A fierce and ruthless
culture existed within the group, inspired by Jelinek’s
ornery personality. Researchers would posit ideas and
colleagues would do everything they could to eviscerate
them, throwing personal jabs along the way. They’d fight
it out until reaching a consensus on the merits of the
suggestion. Twin brothers in the group, Stephen and
Vincent Della Pietra, each of whom had undergraduate
degrees in physics from Princeton and doctorates in
physics from Harvard, leveled some of the most vicious
assaults, racing to a whiteboard to prove how foolish
each other’s arguments had been. It was no-holds-barred
intellectual combat. Outside of a research lab, such
behavior might be considered rude and offensive, but

many of Jelinek’s staffers usually didn’t take it
personally.
“We ripped each other to shreds,” recalls David
Magerman, an intern on the IBM speech team. “And
then we played tennis together.”
Beyond a talent for cruel and colorful nicknames,
Brown stood out for having unusual commercial
instincts, perhaps the result of his father’s influence.
Brown urged IBM to use the team’s advances to sell new
products to customers, such as a credit-evaluation
service, and even tried to get management to let them
manage a few billion dollars of IBM’s pension-fund
investments with their statistical approach, but failed to
garner much support.
“What kind of investing experience do you have?” a
colleague recalls an IBM executive asking Brown.
“None,” Brown replied.
At one point, Brown learned of a team of computer
scientists, led by a former Carnegie Mellon classmate,
that was programming a computer to play chess. He set
out to convince IBM to hire the team. One winter day,
while Brown was in an IBM men’s room, he got to talking
with Abe Peled, a senior IBM research executive, about
the exorbitant cost of the upcoming Super Bowl’s
television commercials. Brown said he had a way to get
the company exposure at a much lower cost—hire the
Carnegie Mellon team and reap the resulting publicity
when their machine beat a world champion in chess. The
team members also might be able to assist IBM’s
research, Brown argued.
The IBM brass loved the idea and hired the team,
which brought its Deep Thought program along. As the
machine won matches and attracted attention, though,
complaints emerged. It turned out that the chess
machine’s name made people think of something else—
famed 1972 pornographic film Deep Throat, a movie at

the forefront of what is known as the Golden Age of Porn
(details to follow in my next book). IBM knew it faced a
real problem the day the wife of a member of the chess
team, who taught at a Catholic college, spoke with the
college’s president, an elderly nun, and the sister kept
referring to IBM’s amazing “Deep Throat” program.
IBM ran a contest to rename the chess machine,
choosing Brown’s own submission, Deep Blue, a nod to
IBM’s longtime nickname, Big Blue. A few years later, in
1997, millions would watch on television as Deep Blue
defeated Garry Kasparov, the chess world champion, a
signal that the computing age had truly arrived.6
Brown, Mercer, and the rest of the team made
progress enabling computers to transcribe speech. Later,
Brown realized probabilistic mathematical models also
could be used for translation. Using data that included
thousands of pages of Canadian parliamentary
proceedings featuring paired passages in French and
English, the IBM team made headway toward translating
text between languages. Their advances partly laid the
groundwork for a revolution in computational linguistics
and speech processing, playing a role in future speechrecognition advances, such as Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s
Siri, Google Translate, text-to-speech synthesizers, and
more.
Despite that progress, the researchers were
frustrated by IBM’s lack of a clear plan to let the group
commercialize its advances. Weeks after throwing
Patterson’s letter in the garbage, Brown and Mercer were
forced to reexamine the direction of their lives.
On a late-winter day in southeastern Pennsylvania in
1993, Mercer’s mother was killed and his sister injured
when another driver skidded on ice and crashed into
their car. That Easter, twenty days later, Mercer’s father
succumbed to a progressive illness. A few months later,
when Patterson called to ask why he hadn’t received a
response to his previous letter, Mercer began to consider

a move. Mercer’s third daughter had begun college, and
his family lived in a modest split-level home near ugly
electrical power lines. Eating lunch out of used brown
paper bags had begun to lose its charm.
“Just come and talk to me,” Patterson said. “What
have you got to lose?”
Mercer told a colleague he was skeptical that hedge
funds added anything to society. Another IBM staffer
said any effort to profit from trading was “hopeless”
because markets are so efficient. But Mercer came back
from the visit impressed. Renaissance’s offices, in a hightech incubator on Stony Brook campus, were quite bland.
But they had been designed originally as a chemistry lab,
with tiny windows high up on the walls, a layout that
suggested science, not finance, was the focus of Simons’s
firm, something that appealed to Mercer.
As for Brown, he had heard of Simons, but his
accomplishments meant little to him. Simons was a
geometer, after all, a member of a very different field.
But when Brown learned Simons’s original partner was
Lenny Baum, coinventor of the Baum-Welch algorithm
the IBM speech team relied upon, Brown became more
enthused. By then, his wife, Margaret, had given birth to
their first child, and he faced his own financial concerns.
“I looked at our newborn daughter, and thought
about Bob struggling with college bills, and began to
think that it might actually make some sense to work in
the investment area for a few years,” Brown later told a
group of scientists.
Simons offered to double Brown’s and Mercer’s
salaries and they eventually came on board in 1993—just
as tension was building over the firm’s continued
inability to master stock trading. Some researchers and
others urged Simons to terminate the effort. Frey and his
team had spent enough time and still didn’t have much
to show for themselves, these critics said.

“We’re wasting our time,” one told Frey one day in
the Renaissance lunchroom. “Do we really need to do
this?”
“We’re making progress,” Frey insisted.
Some on the futures team said Frey should give up
on his stock research and work on projects with them.
Publicly and privately, Simons came to Frey’s defense.
Simons said he was sure the team would discover ways to
make huge profits in stock trading, just as Laufer,
Patterson, and others had on their thriving futurestrading side business.
“Let’s just wait a little longer,” Simons told a skeptic.
Others times, he tried bolstering Frey’s confidence.
“That’s good work,” Simons told Frey. “Never give
up.”
Brown and Mercer watched the equity team’s
struggles with particular interest. Shortly after arriving
from IBM, they were split up. Mercer was sent to work in
the futures group, while Brown helped Frey with the
stock picks. Simons was hoping to better integrate them
into the firm, like kids being separated in a classroom
out of fear they’d only talk to each other. In their spare
time, though, Brown and Mercer met, searching for ways
to solve Simons’s dilemma. They thought they might
have a solution. For a true breakthrough, however, they’d
need help from another unusual IBM staffer.

CHAPTER TEN

D well before dawn on a cool morning in the fall of

avid Magerman shut the door of his Boston apartment

1994. He jumped into a silver Toyota Corolla, adjusted
the car’s manual windows, and headed south. The
twenty-six-year-old drove more than three hours on
Interstate 95 before catching a ferry to the tip of Long
Island, arriving for a job interview at Renaissance
Technologies’ offices in Stony Brook before ten a.m.
Magerman seemed a shoo-in for the position. Jim
Simons, Henry Laufer, Nick Patterson, and other staffers
were acclaimed mathematicians and theoreticians, but
Renaissance was starting to develop more-complex
computer-trading models, and few employees could
program very well. That was Magerman’s specialty. He’d
completed a productive stint at IBM, getting to know
Peter Brown and Bob Mercer, and it was Brown who had
invited him for the morning visit, giving Magerman
reason to expect things to go well.
They didn’t. Magerman arrived exhausted from his
morning journey, regretting his penny-pinching decision
not to fly from Boston. Almost immediately, Renaissance
staffers got under Magerman’s skin, presenting a series
of difficult questions and tasks to test his competence in
mathematics and other areas. Simons was low-key in a
brief sit-down, but one of his researchers grilled
Magerman on an obscure academic paper, making him
work out a vexing problem at a tall whiteboard. It didn’t
seem fair; the paper was the staffer’s own overlooked
PhD dissertation, yet he expected Magerman to
somehow demonstrate a mastery of the topic.

Magerman took the challenges a bit too personally,
unsure why he was being asked to prove himself, and he
overcompensated for his nervousness by acting cockier
than he actually felt. By the day’s end, Simons’s team had
decided Magerman was too immature for the job. His
appearance added to the juvenile image. Sandy-haired
and husky, with a baby face and rosy-pink cheeks,
Magerman looked very much like an overgrown boy.
Brown stood up for Magerman, vouching for his
programming skills, while Mercer also lent support. They
both saw Medallion’s computer code growing in size and
complexity and concluded that the hedge fund
desperately needed additional firepower.
“You’re sure about him?” someone asked Brown.
“You’re sure he’s good?”
“Trust us,” Brown responded.
Later, when Magerman expressed interest in the job,
Brown toyed with him, pretending that Renaissance had
lost its interest, a prank that left Magerman anxious for
days. Finally, Brown extended a formal offer. Magerman
joined the firm in the summer of 1995, determined to do
everything possible to win over his doubters. Until then,
Magerman had spent much of his life trying to please
authority figures, usually with mixed results.
Growing up, Magerman had a strained relationship
with his father, Melvin, a Brooklyn cabbie plagued with
awful luck. Unable to afford a taxi medallion in New
York, Melvin moved his family to Kendall, Florida,
fourteen miles southwest of Miami, ignoring David’s
heated protests. (On the eve of their departure, the eightyear-old ran away from home in a fit of anger, getting as
far as a neighbor’s house across the street, where he
spent the afternoon until his parents retrieved him.)
For several years, Melvin drove a taxi, stuffing cash
into Maxwell House coffee tins hidden around the home
as he and his brother-in-law, with help from a wealthy

patron, crafted a plan to buy a local cab company. On the
eve of the deal, the patron suffered a fatal heart attack,
scuttling Melvin’s big plans. Plagued by depression
throughout his life, Melvin found his mood turning still
darker, and he was unable to drive a cab. Melvin
collected rent at his brother-in-law’s trailer park as his
mental health deteriorated further. He grew aloof with
David and his sister, both of whom had close
relationships with their mother, Sheila, an office
manager at an accounting firm.
The Magerman family lived in a lower-middle-class
neighborhood populated by a mix of young families,
criminals, and oddballs—including drug dealers across
the street who entertained visitors at all hours, and a gun
nut who liked to shoot at birds, which landed with some
regularity in the Magerman backyard.
For most of his youth, David skirted serious trouble.
To raise spending cash, he hawked flowers on the side of
a road and sold candy in school. He’d buy candy bars and
other merchandise with his father at a local drugstore
and sell it out of a duffel bag to classmates at slightly
higher prices. The unsanctioned business thrived until
the school’s rival candy man, a muscular Russian kid,
was busted and pointed to David as his operation’s
ringleader. The school’s principal, who already had
labeled David a troublemaker, suspended him. While
serving time in a library room with other miscreants, as
in The Breakfast Club, an attractive female classmate
asked David to join her cocaine-delivery operation in
Miami. (It wasn’t clear if she realized David had been
busted for distributing Snickers and 3 Musketeers bars,
experience that wouldn’t have been of much use when
selling cocaine.) David politely declined, noting that he
had only a bicycle for transportation.
David placed most of his focus on his studies,
relishing the unequivocal praise he received from
teachers, parents, and others, especially after winning

trophies at academic competitions. David participated in
a local program for gifted students, learned to program
computers at a community college, and won a
scholarship after seventh grade to attend a private
middle school a forty-five-minute bus ride away. There
he learned Latin and jumped two grades in math.
Outside the classroom, David felt ostracized. He was
insecure about his family’s economic position, especially
compared with those of his new schoolmates, and vowed
to enjoy his own wealth one day. David ended up
spending large chunks of the day in the school’s
computer lab.
“That’s where we nerds hid from the football
players,” he says.
At home, Melvin, a math whiz who never had the
opportunity to fully employ his talents, took his
frustrations out on his son. After Melvin criticized David
for being overweight, the young man became a longdistance runner, starving himself one summer until he
showed signs of anorexia, hoping for some kind of praise
from his father. Later, David entered long-distance races,
emulating his track coach, though his body usually broke
down by the thirteenth mile of their training sessions.
“I was easily motivated by coaches,” Magerman
recalls.
He continued to seek the approval of those in
positions of power and seek new father figures, even as
he developed a mystifying need to pick fights, even
unnecessary ones.
“I needed to right wrongs and fight for justice, even if
I was turning molehills into mountains,” Magerman
acknowledges. “I clearly had a messiah complex.”
One year in high school, when he learned a track
meet was scheduled for the second night of Passover,
Magerman rallied local rabbis to his cause to have the

meet canceled. His disappointed teammates didn’t
understand why Magerman cared so much; even he
wasn’t entirely sure.
“I was a mediocre runner and wasn’t even religious. I
don’t think we even had a second seder,” Magerman
recalls. “It was a schmucky thing to do.”
During his senior year, Magerman and a couple of
friends announced they were leaving to spend the second
semester studying at a school in Israel, partly because
the principal of their high school had warned him against
the idea. Magerman seemed to be searching for structure
in his life. In Jerusalem, the young man began
memorizing religious books, studying history, and
adopting religious practices, drinking in the praise from
teachers and the school’s headmaster.
Before leaving for Israel, Magerman left his college
essays and applications with his mother in Florida, so
she could mail them to the various schools. That spring,
Magerman was accepted by the University of
Pennsylvania but was rejected by every other Ivy League
school, surprising and disappointing him. Years later,
while clearing out his mother’s home, Magerman
stumbled upon a copy of his Harvard University
application. He discovered that she had reworked his
essay, as she had for almost every other school, excising
all references to Israel and Judaism, worried that antiSemitism might deter schools from accepting him. For
whatever reason, she thought Penn was a Jewish
university, so she left that one untouched.
Magerman thrived at Penn, partly because he had
embraced a new cause—proving the other schools had
made a mistake turning him down. He excelled in his
majors, computer science and mathematics. Chosen to
be a teaching assistant in a computational-linguistics
course, he lapped up the resulting attention and respect
of his fellow students, especially the coeds. His senioryear thesis also gained some recognition. Magerman, an

adorable, if insecure, teddy bear of a kid, was finally in
his element.
At Stanford University, Magerman’s doctoral thesis
tackled the exact topic Brown, Mercer, and other IBM
researchers were struggling with: how computers could
analyze and translate language using statistics and
probability. In 1992, IBM offered Magerman an
internship. By then, he had adopted a somewhat thicker
exterior and flourished in the group’s sharp-elbowed
culture. Magerman eventually received a full-time
position at IBM, though he saw less success in other
areas of his life. After spotting a young woman named
Jennifer in his group, Magerman hit on her, suffering
almost immediate rejection.
“She wanted nothing to do with me,” he says.
It probably was for the best—it turned out that
Jennifer, who went by Jenji, was the eldest daughter of
Bob Mercer.
When Magerman joined Renaissance in 1995,
Simons’s firm didn’t seem close to becoming an investing
power. Its headquarters had been built to house a
cutting-edge startup, but the dreary space, close to a
hospital, looked more appropriate for a fading insurance
company. Simons’s thirty or so employees sat in drab
cubicles and nondescript offices. The walls were a bare,
ugly off-white, and the furniture resembled Rent-ACenter rejects. On warm days, Simons meandered
around in Bermuda shorts and open-toed sandals,
underscoring the hedge fund’s not-ready-for-prime-time
feel.
Yet there also was something vaguely intimidating
about the place, at least to Magerman. Part of it was
simply the stature of his new colleagues—figuratively and
physically. Almost everyone was well over six feet tall,
towering over the five-foot-five Magerman, breeding new
insecurities in the bachelor. Magerman didn’t have

friends or family in the area, either. He was thrilled when
Mercer’s wife, Diana, invited him to a family movie
outing, capped by dessert at a Friendly’s restaurant.
Magerman gratefully joined the Mercers on subsequent
evenings, easing his transition.
It didn’t take long for Magerman to realize
Renaissance had a serious problem on its hands. Frey’s
stock-trading system had proved a dud, losing nearly 5
percent of its money in 1994. There was a certain genius
to Frey’s model—its statistical-arbitrage trades looked
great on paper and should have made a lot of money.
They never did, though, at least not nearly as much as
the model’s simulations suggested they should. It was
like detecting obvious signs of gold buried deep in a
mountain without having a reliable way to get it out.
In meetings, Simons sometimes shook his head,
appearing to grow disappointed with the system, which
they called “Nova,” taking the name of Frey’s firm, which
had been subsumed into Renaissance.
“It’s just limping along,” Simons said one day.
Mercer, who continued to work with Brown on the
side, tweaking their own version of a stock-trading
model, diagnosed the key problem. With a look of delight
on his face, Mercer roamed the halls quoting a proverb:
“There’s many a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip.”
In those few words, Mercer was acknowledging that
Frey’s trading system was churning out brilliant trade
ideas. But something was going wrong as it tried to
implement the trades, preventing the system from
making much money. Eventually, Simons and Frey
decided it was best for Frey to shift to a different
company project.
“I wasn’t the best person to get the trains running on
time,” he acknowledges.

Around the same time, Mercer won approval from
Simons to join Brown in the stock-research area. It was a
last chance for Simons to create something special and
grow his firm.
“Guys, let’s make some money,” Simons said in a
weekly meeting, his patience appearing to grow thin.
The Brown-Mercer reunion represented a new
chapter in an unusual partnership between two scientists
with distinct personalities who worked remarkably well
together. Brown was blunt, argumentative, persistent,
loud, and full of energy. Mercer conserved his words and
rarely betrayed emotion, as if he was playing a neverending game of poker. The pairing worked, though, yin
with yang.
Years earlier, as Brown was completing his doctoral
thesis, he shed some light on how much he leaned on his
cryptic colleague.
“Time and time again, I would come up with some
idea and then realize that it was just something that Bob
had urged me to try months before,” Brown wrote in his
introduction. “It was as if, step by step, I was uncovering
some master plan.”
At industry conferences during their tenure at IBM,
Brown and Mercer sometimes sat together, rows from
the stage, consumed by their intense chess matches while
ignoring the ongoing lectures until it was time for their
own presentation. They developed a certain work style—
Brown would quickly write drafts of their research and
then pass them to Mercer, a much better writer, who
would begin slow and deliberate rewrites.
Brown and Mercer threw themselves into their new
assignment to revamp Frey’s model. They worked late
into the evening and even went home together; during
the week they shared a living space in the attic of a local
elderly woman’s home, returning to their families on
weekends. Over time, Brown and Mercer discovered

methods to improve Simons’s stock-trading system. It
turned out that Frey’s model made suggestions that were
impractical, or even impossible. For example, the Nova
fund faced broker-imposed limits to the amount of
leverage, or borrowed money, it could use. So, when
Nova’s leverage crossed a certain threshold, Frey and
staffers manually shrank the portfolio to remain within
the necessary limits, overriding their model’s
recommendations.
Other times, Frey’s model picked trades that seemed
attractive but couldn’t actually be completed. For
instance, it told Nova to short, or bet against, certain
stocks that weren’t actually available to be sold, so Frey
had to ignore the recommendations.
Not completing desired trades resulted in more than
just poor performance. The factor-trading system
generated a series of complicated and intertwined trades,
each necessary to score profits while also keeping risk at
reasonable levels. By contrast, futures trading was simple
stuff; if a trade didn’t happen, there were few
consequences. With Frey’s stock-trading system, failing
to get just a few moves done threatened to make the
entire portfolio more sensitive to market shifts,
jeopardizing its overall health. And missed trades
sometimes cascaded into bigger, systemic problems that
compromised the accuracy of the entire model. Getting it
even a little wrong caused big problems that Frey and his
team, using mid-1990s’ technology and their own subpar
software engineering skills, couldn’t address.
“It was like finding a common solution to hundreds
of equations simultaneously,” Frey says.
Brown and Mercer seized on a different approach.
They decided to program the necessary limitations and
qualifications into a single trading system that could
automatically handle all potential complications. Since
Brown and Mercer were computer scientists, and they
had spent years developing large-scale software projects

at IBM and elsewhere, they had the coding chops to build
a single automated system for trading stocks. By
contrast, the coding of Frey’s previous system had been
done piecemeal, making it hard to unify the entire
portfolio in a way that allowed it to meet all of the
trading requirements.
“The people at Renaissance . . . didn’t really know
how to make big systems,” Mercer later explained.1
Brown and Mercer treated their challenge as a math
problem, just as they had with language recognition at
IBM. Their inputs were the fund’s trading costs, its
various leverages, risk parameters, and assorted other
limitations and requirements. Given all of those factors,
they built the system to solve and construct an ideal
portfolio, making optimal decisions, all day long, to
maximize returns.
The beauty of the approach was that, by combining
all their trading signals and portfolio requirements into a
single, monolithic model, Renaissance could easily test
and add new signals, instantly knowing if the gains from
a potential new strategy were likely to top its costs. They
also made their system adaptive, or capable of learning
and adjusting on its own, much like Henry Laufer’s
trading system for futures. If the model’s recommended
trades weren’t executed, for whatever reason, it selfcorrected, automatically searching for buy-or-sell orders
to nudge the portfolio back where it needed to be, a way
of solving the issue that had hamstrung Frey’s model.
The system repeated on a loop several times an hour,
conducting an optimization process that weighed
thousands of potential trades before issuing electronic
trade instructions. Rivals didn’t have self-improving
models; Renaissance now had a secret weapon, one that
would prove crucial to the fund’s future success.
Eventually, Brown and Mercer developed an
elaborate stock-trading system that featured a half
million lines of code, compared to tens of thousands of

lines in Frey’s old system. The new system incorporated
all necessary restrictions and requirements; in many
ways, it was just the kind of automated trading system
Simons had dreamed of years earlier. Because the Nova
fund’s stock trades were now less sensitive to the
market’s fluctuations, it began holding on to shares a bit
longer, two days or so, on average.
Crucially, Brown and Mercer retained the prediction
model Frey had developed from his Morgan Stanley
experience. It continued to identify enough winning
trades to make serious money, usually by wagering on
reversions after stocks got out of whack. Over the years,
Renaissance would add twists to this bedrock strategy,
but, for more than a decade, those would just be second
order complements to the firm’s core reversion-to-themean predictive signals.
An employee boils it down succinctly: “We make
money from the reactions people have to price moves.”
Brown and Mercer’s new and improved trading
system was implemented in 1995, a welcome relief for
Simons and others. Soon, Simons made Brown and
Mercer partners in Renaissance, and they were elevated
to managers, receiving points, or a percentage of the
firm’s profits, like other senior members of the team.
Simons acted too quickly, it turned out. It soon
became clear that the new stock-trading system couldn’t
handle much money, undermining Simons’s original
purpose in pushing into equities. Renaissance placed a
puny $35 million in stocks; when more money was
traded, the gains dissipated, much like Frey’s system a
couple years earlier. Even worse, Brown and Mercer
couldn’t figure out why their system was running into so
many problems.
Looking for help, they began to reassemble their
team from IBM, recruiting new talent, including the

Della Pietra twins, and then Magerman, who hoped to be
the one to save the system.

=
As soon as he joined Renaissance, Magerman focused on
solving problems and gaining the appreciation of his new
colleagues. At one point, Magerman convinced staffers
that they needed to learn C++, a general-purpose
computer language that he insisted was much better than
C and other languages the hedge fund used.
“C is so 1980,” Magerman told a colleague.
It was true that C++ was a better language, though
the shift wasn’t quite as necessary as he suggested,
especially at that juncture. Magerman, an expert in C++,
had an ulterior motive—he wanted to become
indispensable to his officemates. His stratagem worked.
The company converted to C++ and, before long,
mathematicians and others were begging Magerman for
help, day and night.
“I became their pet,” he recalls.
Magerman spent all of his free time learning the
firm’s stock-trading tactics, devouring each morsel of
information. Brown, who had a natural ability to
understand the needs of underlings, acted impressed,
sensing he could motivate Magerman to work even
harder by lobbing some accolades his way.
“I really thought it would take you more time” to
develop such deep knowledge of the stock-trading
system, Brown told him one day, as Magerman beamed
with pride.
Magerman understood Brown was manipulating
him, but he soaked the compliments up, nonetheless,
eager to find additional ways to help. Back at IBM,
Magerman had developed a script, or a short list of
instructions, to monitor the memory and resources of the

company’s computers so he and others could
commandeer the top brass’s powerful and underutilized
machines to enter outside coding competitions and
engage in other unauthorized activity. Magerman, who
had found an ingenious way to erase traces of his
activity, called his program Joshua, after the computer
gifted with artificial intelligence in the 1983 hacker film
WarGames.
Eventually, Magerman was caught by a furious IBM
executive who said his machine had been purchased
under a top-secret government contract and could
contain classified material. He threatened to report
Magerman for committing a federal crime.
“How was I supposed to know?” Magerman
responded, referring to the company’s secret relationship
with the government.
Magerman’s hacking continued, of course, but he
and his colleagues made sure to sidestep the angry
executive’s computer and tap into others’ machines
instead when they needed extra computing power.
At Renaissance, Magerman rewrote the same
monitoring tool. True, there weren’t any underused
computers at the hedge fund like there were at IBM, but
Magerman thought his program could be useful, at least
down the line. Mostly, he just couldn’t help himself.
“I wanted to be the most indispensable person in the
company,” he explains.
Magerman tricked Renaissance’s systems
administrator and created a backdoor way to launch his
monitoring system. Then, he sat back in his chair,
proudly, waiting for the accolades to roll in. Magerman’s
high lasted a fleeting moment or two. Suddenly, he heard
shouts from alarmed colleagues. As Magerman stared at
his computer screen, his jaw dropped—his unauthorized
monitoring program had unleashed a computer virus
that was infecting Renaissance’s computers, smack in the

middle of the trading day, jeopardizing all kinds of
research. As staffers raced to deal with the crisis, an
abashed Magerman admitted he was responsible for the
chaos.
Staffers were furious—the equities team wasn’t
making any money, and now the stupid group was
crashing the network!
Brown, red with rage, hustled over to Magerman and
got in his face.
“This isn’t IBM!” Brown screamed. “We’re trading
real money here! If you get in the way with your stupid
stunts, you’re going to ruin things for us!”
Weeks into his tenure, Magerman was a sudden
outcast. He fretted about his job and wondered if he had
any future at Renaissance.
“It was a huge blunder, socially,” he says.
The gaffe couldn’t have come at a worse time. Brown
and Mercer’s new stock-trading system was struggling
with a painful and inexplicable losing streak. Something
was awry and no one could figure out what it was.
Members of the futures team, which continued to rack
up profits, whispered that the problems stemmed from
the new hires, who were “just computer guys.” Even at
Renaissance, that could be a dis, it turned out.
In public, Simons professed confidence, encouraging
his team to keep at it.
“We have to keep trying,” he said in a group meeting
in the summer of 1995, still an intimidating presence
despite his shorts and sandals.
Privately, though, Simons wondered if he was
wasting his time. Maybe the team would never figure out
equities, and Renaissance was destined to remain a
relatively small futures-trading firm. It was a conclusion
Laufer, Patterson, and others in the futures group
already had reached.

“We had given it years already,” Patterson says. “If I
was calling the shots, I might very well have pulled the
plug.”
Simons remained a stubborn optimist. But even he
decided enough was enough. Simons gave Brown and
Mercer an ultimatum: Get your system to work in the
next six months, or I’m pulling the plug. Brown stayed
up nights searching for a solution, sleeping on a Murphy
bed built into his office. Mercer’s hours weren’t quite as
long, but they were equally intense. They still couldn’t
find the problem. The trading system scored sizable
gains when it managed tiny amounts of money, but when
Simons fed it leverage and the trades got bigger, profits
evaporated. Brown and Mercer’s simulations kept saying
they should be making money with the larger sums, but
the system’s actual moves were losers, not unlike Frey’s
own trades years earlier.
Mercer seemed calm and unperturbed, but Brown’s
nerves were on edge, as others turned anxious around
him.
“Every two- or three-day losing streak felt like the
beginning of the end,” says a team member.
Magerman watched the mounting frustrations and
ached to aid the effort. If he could save the day, maybe
he’d win his bosses over despite his earlier, costly flub.
Magerman knew enough at that point not to volunteer
his assistance. On his own, though, he pored over code,
day and night. At the time, Magerman lived in an
apartment that was an absolute mess—it lacked a
working stove and there was usually close to nothing in
the refrigerator—so he effectively lived in the office,
searching for a way to help.
Early one evening, his eyes blurry from staring at his
computer screen for hours on end, Magerman spotted
something odd: A line of simulation code used for Brown
and Mercer’s trading system showed the Standard &

Poor’s 500 at an unusually low level. This test code
appeared to use a figure from back in 1991 that was
roughly half the current number. Mercer had written it
as a static figure, rather than as a variable that updated
with each move in the market.
When Magerman fixed the bug and updated the
number, a second problem—an algebraic error—
appeared elsewhere in the code. Magerman spent most
of the night on it but he thought he solved that one, too.
Now the simulator’s algorithms could finally recommend
an ideal portfolio for the Nova system to execute,
including how much borrowed money should be
employed to expand its stock holdings. The resulting
portfolio seemed to generate big profits, at least
according to Magerman’s calculations.
Overcome with excitement, he raced to tell Brown
what he had discovered. Brown flashed his breathless
colleague a look of deep skepticism but agreed to hear
Magerman out. Afterward, Brown still showed little
enthusiasm. Mercer had done the coding for the system,
after all. Everyone knew Mercer rarely made errors,
especially mathematical ones. Crestfallen, Magerman
slunk away. His screwup had branded him a nuisance,
not any kind of potential savior.
Without much to lose, Magerman brought his work
to Mercer, who also agreed to take a look. Sitting at his
desk, hunched over his computer, Mercer patiently
examined the old code, line by line, comparing it to
Magerman’s new code. Slowly, a smile formed on his
face. Mercer reached for some paper and a pencil from
his desk and began working on a formula. He was
checking Magerman’s work. After about fifteen minutes
of scribbling, Mercer put his pencil down and looked up.
“You’re right,” Mercer told Magerman.
Later, Mercer convinced Brown that Magerman was
on to something. But when Brown and Mercer told other

staffers about the problem that had been uncovered, as
well as the fix, they were met with incredulity, even
laughter. A junior programmer fixed the problem? The
same guy who had crashed the system a few weeks after
being hired?
Brown and Mercer ignored the doubts and restarted
the system, with Simons’s backing, incorporating the
improvements and corrections. Instant gains resulted,
defying the skeptics. The long losing streak was over.
Magerman finally received the appreciation he longed
for, receiving a cherished pat on the back from Brown.
“This is great,” Simons boomed at a weekly meeting.
“Let’s keep it going.”
A new era for both Magerman and the firm seemed
within reach.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

J

im Simons walked the halls, full of nervous energy.

It was the summer of 1997, and Simons sensed he
might be close to something special. His Medallion
hedge fund now managed over $900 million, mostly in
futures contracts tracking commodities, currencies,
bonds, and stock indexes. Henry Laufer’s group, which
traded all these investments, was on a roll. Laufer’s key
strategies—including buying on the most propitious days
of the week, as well as at the ideal moments of the day—
remained winners. Simons’s team also had perfected the
skill of mapping the two-day trajectories of various
investments.
Now Simons was becoming convinced Peter Brown
and Bob Mercer’s ten-person team had turned a corner
with its statistical-arbitrage strategy, providing Simons
with a welcome distraction as he dealt with enduring
grief from his son’s death a year earlier. Though the
stock-trading profits were a puny few million dollars a
month, they were enough to spur Simons to merge the
Nova fund into Medallion, creating a single hedge fund
trading almost every investment.
Simons and his team had yet to solve the market,
however. Medallion gained 21 percent in 1997, a bit
lower from the 32 percent results a year earlier, the over
38 percent gain in 1995, and the 71 percent jump in 1994.
Its trading system still ran into serious issues. One day, a
data-entry error caused the fund to purchase five times
as many wheat-futures contracts as it intended, pushing
prices higher. Picking up the next day’s Wall Street
Journal, sheepish staffers read that analysts were

attributing the price surge to fears of a poor wheat
harvest, rather than Renaissance’s miscue.
A bit later, Patterson helped roll out a new model to
trade equity options, but it generated only modest
profits, frustrating Simons.
“Nick, your options system needs help,” Simons told
him in a meeting. “It needs to be better.”
Simons pointed to the huge, steady gains that
another investor was making trading equity options at
his growing firm, Bernard L. Madoff Investment
Securities.
“Look at what Madoff is doing,” Simons told
Patterson.
The criticism grated on Patterson, who gave Simons
a tart retort: “Maybe you should hire Bernie.” (A few
years later, Simons would become suspicious of Madoff’s
extraordinary results and pull money he had invested in
Madoff’s fund. In 2008, Madoff would acknowledge
running history’s largest Ponzi scheme.)
Nervous about the slipping returns, Simons
proposed a new idea. Each year, tens of thousands of
peer-reviewed research papers are published in
disciplines including economics, finance, and
psychology. Many delve into the inner workings of
financial markets and demonstrate methods of scoring
outsize returns, yet are left in history’s dustpan. Each
week, Simons decided, Brown, Mercer, and other senior
executives would be assigned three papers to read,
digest, and present—a book club for quants with a
passion for money rather than sex or murder.
After reading several hundred papers, Simons and
his colleagues gave up. The tactics sounded tantalizing,
but when Medallion’s researchers tested the efficacy of
the strategies proposed by the academics, the trade
recommendations usually failed to pan out. Reading so

many disappointing papers reinforced a certain cynicism
within the firm about the ability to predict financial
moves.
“Any time you hear financial experts talking about
how the market went up because of such and such—
remember it’s all nonsense,” Brown later would say.

=
As he led weekly meetings, chatted with employees, and
huddled with Laufer, Brown, and Mercer in their
cramped offices in Stony Brook’s high-tech incubator,
Simons emphasized several long-held principles, many
of which he had developed earlier in his career breaking
code at the IDA and in his years working with talented
mathematicians at Stony Brook University. Now he was
fully applying them at Renaissance.
A key one: Scientists and mathematicians need to
interact, debate, and share ideas to generate ideal
results. Simons’s precept might seem self-evident, but, in
some ways, it was radical. Many of Renaissance’s
smartest staffers had enjoyed achievement and
recognition earlier in their careers toiling away on
individual research, rather than teaming with others.
Indeed, talented quants can be among the least
comfortable working with others. (A classic industry
joke: Extroverted mathematicians are the ones who stare
at your shoes during a conversation, not their own.)
Rival trading firms often dealt with the issue by
allowing researchers and others to work in silos,
sometimes even competing with each other. Simons
insisted on a different approach—Medallion would have
a single, monolithic trading system. All staffers enjoyed
full access to each line of the source code underpinning
their moneymaking algorithms, all of it readable in
cleartext on the firm’s internal network. There would be
no corners of the code accessible only to top executives;

anyone could make experimental modifications to
improve the trading system. Simons hoped his
researchers would swap ideas, rather than embrace
private projects. (For a while, even the firm’s secretaries
had access to the source code, though that ultimately
proved unwieldy.)
Simons created a culture of unusual openness.
Staffers wandered into colleagues’ offices offering
suggestions and initiating collaborations. When they ran
into frustrations, the scientists tended to share their
work and ask for help, rather than move on to new
projects, ensuring that promising ideas weren’t “wasted,”
as Simons put it. Groups met regularly, discussing
intimate details of their progress and fielding probing
questions from Simons. Most staffers ate lunch together,
ordering from local restaurants and then squeezing into
a tiny lunchroom. Once a year, Simons paid to bring
employees and their spouses to exotic vacation locales,
strengthening the camaraderie.
Peer pressure became a crucial motivational tool.
Researchers, programmers, and others spent much of
their time working on presentations. They burned to
impress each other—or, at least, not embarrass
themselves in front of colleagues—spurring them to plug
away at challenging problems and develop ingenious
approaches.
“If you didn’t make much progress, you’d feel
pressure,” Frey says. “That was how your self-worth was
determined.”
Simons used compensation to get staffers focused on
the firm’s overall success. Every six months, employees
received a bonus, but only if Medallion surpassed a
certain profit level. The firm paid some of the money
over several years, helping to keep the talent around. It
didn’t matter if staffers uncovered new signals, cleaned
data, or did other lower-profile tasks; if they
distinguished themselves, and Medallion thrived, they

were rewarded with bonus points, each of which
represented a percentage of Renaissance’s profit pool
and was based on clear, understood formulas.
“You know your formula from the beginning of the
year. It’s the same as everyone else’s with just a couple of
different coefficients, depending on your position,” says
Glen Whitney, who was a top manager of Renaissance’s
infrastructure. “You want a bigger bonus? Help the fund
get higher returns in whatever way you can: discover a
predictive source, fix a bug, make the code run faster, get
coffee for the woman down the hall with a great idea,
whatever . . . bonuses depend on how well the fund
performs, not if your boss liked your tie.”
Simons began sharing equity, handing a 10 percent
stake in the firm to Laufer and, later, giving sizable slices
to Brown, Mercer, and Mark Silber, who now was the
firm’s chief financial officer, and others, steps that
reduced Simons’s ownership to just over 50 percent.
Other top-performing employees could buy shares,
which represented equity in the firm. Staffers also could
invest in Medallion, perhaps the biggest perk of them all.
Simons was embracing immense risk. Hotshot
researchers and others were liable to become frustrated
working in a flat organization that spread its largesse
around and made it harder to stand out. Full access to
the system’s code enabled staffers to walk out the door,
join a rival, and tap Renaissance’s secrets. But, since so
many of them were PhDs from the world of academia
with limited familiarity with Wall Street, Simons
believed the chance of defection was relatively small.
Unusually onerous lifetime nondisclosure agreements, as
well as noncompete contracts, also reduced the danger.
(Later, they’d learn the agreements couldn’t eliminate
the risk of employees defecting with the firm’s
intellectual property.)
Other than a few old-school traders who completed
transactions, many at Renaissance didn’t seem to

prioritize wealth. When celebrated computer scientist
Peter Weinberger interviewed for a job in 1996, he stood
in the parking lot, sizing up the researchers he was about
to meet. He couldn’t help chuckling.
“It was a lot of old, crappy cars,” he recalls. “Saturns,
Corollas, and Camrys.”
Some employees didn’t know if the fund was making
or losing money each day; a few had no idea how to even
locate monthly performance figures on Renaissance’s
web page. During the few losing streaks Medallion
encountered in the period, these oblivious staffers
walked around happy-go-lucky, annoying employees
more conscious of the troubles.
Some employees seemed embarrassed by their
swelling wealth. As a group of researchers chatted in the
lunchroom in 1997, one asked if any of his colleagues
flew first-class. The table turned silent. Not a single one
did, it seemed. Finally, an embarrassed mathematician
spoke up.
“I do,” he admitted, feeling the need to offer an
explanation. “My wife insists on it.”
Despite the Medallion fund’s impressive gains, hiring
could present a challenge. Few recruits had heard of
Renaissance, and joining the firm meant sacrificing
individual recognition to work on projects that never
would garner publicity or acclaim, a foreign concept to
most academics. To woo talent, Simons, Nick Patterson,
and others emphasized the positive aspects of their jobs.
Many scientists and mathematicians are born puzzlesolvers, for example, so the Renaissance executives
spoke of the rewards that come with solving difficult
trading problems. Others were attracted to the
camaraderie and fast pace of a hedge fund. Academics
can slog along for years on academic papers; by contrast,
Simons pushed for results within weeks, if not days, an
urgency that held appeal. The atmosphere was informal

and academic, yet intense; one visitor likened it to a
“perpetual exam week.”1
At IBM, Mercer had become frustrated with the
speech-recognition world, where scientists could pretend
to make progress, relying on what he called “parlor
tricks.” At Renaissance, he and his colleagues couldn’t
fool anyone.
“You have money in the bank or not, at the end of the
day,” Mercer told science writer Sharon McGrayne. “You
don’t have to wonder if you succeeded . . . it’s just a very
satisfying thing.”2
The interview process was somewhat ad hoc—discuss
your achievements, tackle some challenging problems
involving probability theory and other areas, and see if
there might be a fit at the firm. Candidates usually were
grilled by a half dozen staffers for forty-five minutes each
and then were asked to present lectures about their
scientific research to the entire firm. Simons and
Patterson generally focused on hiring seasoned
academics who boasted a series of accomplishments, or
new PhDs with dissertations they deemed strong. Even
big-name recruits had to pass a coding test, a
requirement that sent a message that everyone was
expected to program computers and do tasks deemed
menial at other firms. They’d also have to get along with
each other.
“The chemistry is important,” says a current
executive. “It’s like joining a family.”

=
By 1997, Medallion’s staffers had settled on a three-step
process to discover statistically significant moneymaking
strategies, or what they called their trading signals.
Identify anomalous patterns in historic pricing data;
make sure the anomalies were statistically significant,

consistent over time, and nonrandom; and see if the
identified pricing behavior could be explained in a
reasonable way.
For a while, the patterns they wagered on were
primarily those Renaissance researchers could
understand. Most resulted from relationships between
price, volume, and other market data and were based on
the historic behavior of investors or other factors. One
strategy with enduring success: betting on retracements.
About 60 percent of investments that experienced big,
sudden price rises or drops would snap back, at least
partially, it turned out. Profits from these retracements
helped Medallion do especially well in volatile markets
when prices lurched, before retracing some of that
ground.
By 1997, though, more than half of the trading
signals Simons’s team was discovering were
nonintuitive, or those they couldn’t fully understand.
Most quant firms ignore signals if they can’t develop a
reasonable hypothesis to explain them, but Simons and
his colleagues never liked spending too much time
searching for the causes of market phenomena. If their
signals met various measures of statistical strength, they
were comfortable wagering on them. They only steered
clear of the most preposterous ideas.
“Volume divided by price change three days earlier,
yes, we’d include that,” says a Renaissance executive.
“But not something nonsensical, like the outperformance
of stock tickers starting with the letter A.”
It’s not that they wanted trades that didn’t make any
sense; it’s just that these were the statistically valid
strategies they were finding. Recurring patterns without
apparent logic to explain them had an added bonus:
They were less likely to be discovered and adopted by
rivals, most of whom wouldn’t touch these kind of trades.

“If there were signals that made a lot of sense that
were very strong, they would have long-ago been traded
out,” Brown explained. “There are signals that you can’t
understand, but they’re there, and they can be relatively
strong.”3
The obvious danger with embracing strategies that
don’t make sense: The patterns behind them could result
from meaningless coincidences. If one spends enough
time sorting data, it’s not hard to identify trades that
seem to generate stellar returns but are produced by
happenstance. Quants call this flawed approach data
overfitting. To highlight the folly of relying on signals
with little logic behind them, quant investor David
Leinweber later would determine that US stock returns
can be predicted with 99 percent accuracy by combining
data for the annual butter production in Bangladesh, US
cheese production, and the population of sheep in
Bangladesh and the US.4
Often, the Renaissance researchers’ solution was to
place such head-scratching signals in their trading
system, but to limit the money allocated to them, at least
at first, as they worked to develop an understanding of
why the anomalies appeared. Over time, they frequently
discovered reasonable explanations, giving Medallion a
leg up on firms that had dismissed the phenomena. They
ultimately settled on a mix of sensible signals, surprising
trades with strong statistical results, and a few bizarre
signals so reliable they couldn’t be ignored.
“We ask, ‘Does this correspond to some aspect of
behavior that seems reasonable?’” Simons explained a
few years later.5
Just as astronomers set up powerful machines to
continuously scan the galaxy for unusual phenomena,
Renaissance’s scientists programmed their computers to
monitor financial markets, grinding away until they
discovered overlooked patterns and anomalies. Once

they were determined to be valid, and the firm
determined how much money to place in the trades, the
signals were placed into the system and left to do their
thing, without any interference. By then, Medallion
increasingly was relying on strategies that its system
taught itself, a form of machine learning. The computers,
fed with enough data, were trained to spit out their own
answers. A consistent winner, for example, might
automatically receive more cash, without anyone
approving the shift or even being aware of it.

=
Simons became more enthused about the prospects of
his stat-arb team, though it still managed a small amount
of money. His growing confidence about Renaissance’s
future spurred him to move the firm into a nearby onestory, wood-and-glass compound, where each office
enjoyed a relaxing, bucolic view of the nearby woods. The
headquarters featured a gym, lighted tennis courts, a
library with a fireplace, and a large auditorium with
exposed beams where Simons hosted biweekly seminars
from visiting scholars, usually having little to do with
finance. The trading room, staffed with twenty or so
people, was no bigger than a conference room, but the
cafeteria and common areas were expansive, allowing
staffers to meet, discuss, and debate, filling whiteboards
with formulas and diagrams.
As the stat-arb stock-trading results improved,
Brown and Mercer exhibited a new assertiveness around
the office, and they began wooing former IBM colleagues
to the team. “How would you like to sell out and join our
technical trading firm?” Brown wrote in an email to one
IBM staffer.
Soon, a half dozen IBM alumni were contributing to
the firm, including the Della Pietra twins. The brothers—
known for their massive collection of nutcracker

figurines and Stephen’s insistence that colleagues place
his name before his brother’s on group emails—managed
to speed up parts of a stock-trading system that relied on
multiple programs, a network of computers, and
hundreds of thousands of lines of code.
Intense and energetic, Brown hustled from meeting
to meeting, riding a unicycle through the halls and
almost running over colleagues. Brown worked much of
the night on a computer near the Murphy bed in his
office, grabbing a nap when he tired. Once, as he worked
on a complicated project late in the evening, full of manic
energy despite the hour, Brown picked up the phone to
call a junior associate at home with a pressing question.
A colleague stopped Brown before he could dial.
“Peter, you can’t call him,” he said. “It’s two a.m.”
Brown looked confused, forcing the colleague to
explain himself.
“He doesn’t get paid enough to answer questions at
two a.m.”
“Fine, let’s give him a raise, then,” Brown replied.
“But we have to call him!”
Brown’s wife, Margaret Hamburg, had spent six
years as New York City’s health commissioner,
instituting a needle-exchange program to combat HIV
transmission, among other initiatives. In 1997, Hamburg
and their children moved to Washington, DC, where she
took a senior job in the US Department of Health and
Human Services and later would become the
commissioner of the US Food and Drug Administration.
Brown flew to Washington to be with his family on
weekends, but he now seemed to spend even more time
at work, creating pressure for other members of his
group to match his focus.
“When I’m away from my family, I just like to work,”
he explained to a friend after dragging his feet for weeks

about meeting for dinner.
Analytical and unemotional, Mercer was a natural
sedative for his jittery partner. Mercer worked hard, but
he liked to go home around six p.m. He became involved
with more drama away from the office. Several years
earlier, Mercer’s youngest daughter, Heather Sue, had
persuaded her father to accompany her to a football field
near their home and hold a toy football on the ground so
she could practice placekicking.
“I thought she’d get this kicking out of her system,”
he told a reporter.6
Heather Sue blasted the ball through the uprights,
astonishing her father. She became her high school’s
starting kicker and then enrolled at Duke University,
winning a spot on the varsity football team, the first
woman on a Division I football roster. The following
year, Heather Sue was pushed off the team by her coach,
who later admitted to feeling embarrassed that rival
coaches were mocking him for having a female kicker.
After graduating in 1998, Heather Sue sued Duke for
discrimination, winning $2 million in punitive damages.
Back at the office, Mercer began to show a new side
to his personality. When staffers lunched together, they
mostly steered clear of controversial topics. Not Mercer.
He hardly spoke during many work meetings, but Mercer
turned oddly loquacious over these meals. Some of his
comments—such as his support for the gold standard
and affection for More Guns, Less Crime, the John R.
Lott Jr. book arguing that crime falls when gun
ownership rises—reflected conservative beliefs. Others
were more iconoclastic.
“Gas prices are up . . . we really should fix that,”
Mercer said one day.
Mercer enjoyed goading his colleagues, many of
whom were liberal or libertarian, surprising them with
views that were becoming increasingly radical.

“Clinton should be in jail,” Mercer said over lunch
one day, referring to President Bill Clinton, who was
accused of perjury and obstruction of justice in 1998
related to his relationship with White House intern
Monica Lewinsky. Mercer called Clinton a “rapist” and a
“murderer,” repeating a conspiracy theory that the
president had been involved in a secret drug-running
scheme with the CIA.
Most of Mercer’s colleagues inched away, unwilling
to get into a heated debate. Others, like Patterson, a
fellow political junkie, remained at the lunch table,
debating Mercer. He was stunned a smart scientist could
hold opinions with such flimsy support.
Over time, Mercer’s colleagues would have more
reason for surprise.

=
By the mid-1990s, the internet era was in full swing and
activity was heating up in Silicon Valley. On Wall Street,
investment banks and trading firms were hiring their
own computer pros, high-IQ scientists, and mathematics
PhDs, finally convinced that quantitative strategies could
help them score gains. Simons and his team remained
mere blips on the industry’s radar screen, though. That
was partly by design: Simons instructed his troops to
keep their tactics to themselves, fretting competitors
might adopt their most successful methods.
“At the NSA, the penalty for leaking is twenty-five
years in prison,” Simons liked to tell employees,
somewhat ominously. “Unfortunately, all we can do is
fire you.”
Brown became borderline maniacal about silencing
staffers and investors. Once, when a representative of a
large Japanese insurance company paid a visit, the
visitor placed a tape recorder on a conference room
table, so he could play the conversation back later and be

sure nothing had been lost in the translation. Walking
into the room, Brown saw the machine and nearly had a
nervous breakdown.
“There’s a recorder on the table!” he said, startling
the guest and a Renaissance client representative.
Almost convulsing, Brown pulled his colleague out of
the room.
“I don’t want anyone recording us!” he screamed,
appearing a bit frightened.
The embarrassed representative had to ask the
visitor to kindly turn off his machine.
They were going a bit overboard. At that point, no
one really cared what Simons and his team were up to.
His two largest rivals, Long-Term Capital Management
and D. E. Shaw, were commanding the full attention of
investors.
Founded by John Meriwether—himself a former
mathematics instructor—Long-Term Capital
Management also filled its ranks with professors,
including Eric Rosenfeld, an MIT-trained finance PhD
and computer devotee, and Harvard’s Robert C. Merton
and Myron Scholes, who would become Nobel laureates.
The team—mostly introverts, all intellectuals—
downloaded historic bond prices, distilled overlooked
relationships, and built computer models predicting
future behavior.
Like Renaissance, Meriwether’s group didn’t care
where the overall market or even individual investments
were headed. LTCM’s models identified pricing
anomalies, often between similar investments, then the
Greenwich, Connecticut, hedge fund wagered that the
irregularities would converge and dissipate. Some of
LTCM’s favorite trades entailed buying bonds that had
fallen below historic levels, while selling short, or betting
against, similar bonds that seemed overpriced. LTCM

then waited for a convergence of the bond prices,
profiting as it happened. LTCM grew its positions with a
lot of leverage, or borrowed money, to amplify the gains.
Banks were eager lenders, partly because the hedge fund
eschewed big, risky trades, placing a thousand or so
small, seemingly safe bets.
Mesmerized by LTCM’s all-star team of brainiacs,
investors poured money into the fund. After launching in
1994, LTCM gained an average of nearly 50 percent in its
first three years, managing close to $7 billion in the
summer of 1997, making Simons’s Medallion fund look
like a pip-squeak. After rivals expanded their own
arbitrage trades, Meriwether’s team shifted to newer
strategies, even those the team had little experience with,
such as merger-stock trading and Danish mortgages.
After an annual golf outing in the summer of 1997,
LTCM’s partners announced that investors would have to
withdraw about half their cash as a result of what
executives saw as diminishing opportunities in the
market. Clients lost their minds, pleading with
Meriwether and his colleagues—please, keep our money!
LTCM’s models weren’t prepared for several
shocking events in the summer of 1998, however,
including Russia’s effective default on its debt and a
resulting panic in global markets. As investors fled
investments with risk attached to them, prices of all
kinds of assets reacted in unexpected ways. LTCM
calculated it was unlikely to lose more than $35 million
in a day, but it somehow dropped $553 million on one
Friday in August of that year. Billions evaporated in a
matter of weeks.
Meriwether and his colleagues dialed investors,
trying to raise cash, confident prices would revert to
historic norms, as their models predicted. Reality sunk in
when Meriwether visited a friend, Vinny Mattone, a
veteran trader who favored black silk shirts, weighed

about three hundred pounds, and wore a gold chain and
pinkie ring.
“Where are you?” Mattone asked, bluntly.
“We’re down by half,” Meriwether said.
“You’re finished,” Mattone replied, shocking
Meriwether.
“When you’re down by half, people figure you can go
down all the way,” Mattone explained. “They’re going to
push the market against you. . . . You’re finished.”7
So it was. As LTCM’s equity dropped under $1
billion, and its leverage skyrocketed, the Federal Reserve
stepped in, scared the fund’s collapse would take the
financial system along with it. Prodded by the Fed, a
consortium of banks took control of the fund. In a matter
of months, Meriwether and his colleagues had lost nearly
$2 billion of personal wealth, marks on their careers they
would never erase.
The fiasco soured investors on the whole idea of
using computer models to trade in a systematic way.
“The reputation of quantitative investing itself has
been dealt long-term damage,” BusinessWeek magazine
judged a month later. “Even if these quants do spring
back this autumn, it will be impossible for many of them
to claim that they can reliably produce low-volatility
profits.”8
D. E. Shaw didn’t seem likely to feel much impact
from the troubles. By 1998, the hedge fund started by
former Columbia University computer-science professor
David Shaw with backing from investor Donald Sussman
had grown to several hundred employees. Building on
the statistical-arbitrage stock strategies Shaw had
developed at Morgan Stanley, his company claimed
annual returns of 18 percent on average since launching.
On some days, it was responsible for about 5 percent of
all trading on the New York Stock Exchange. The fund’s

portfolio was market neutral, impervious to the overall
stock market’s ups and downs.
D. E. Shaw embraced a different hiring style than
Renaissance. In addition to asking specific, technical
questions about an applicant’s field of expertise, the firm
challenged recruits with brainteasers, situational
mathematical challenges, and probability puzzles,
including the famed Monty Hall problem, a brain teaser
based on the old television show Let’s Make a Deal.
Employees, many of whom were fans of the British
science-fiction television show Doctor Who, dressed
informally, breaking Wall Street’s stiff mold.
A 1996 cover story in Fortune magazine declared D.
E. Shaw “the most intriguing and mysterious force on
Wall Street . . . the ultimate quant shop, a nest of
mathematicians, computer scientists, and other devotees
of quantitative analysis.” As Shaw and other quant firms
expanded, the New York Stock Exchange was forced to
automate, an electronic stock exchange evolved, and
eventually stocks were traded in penny increments,
reducing trading costs for all investors.
Shaw began spending time away from the office,
advising Vice President Al Gore and President Bill
Clinton on technology policy. His firm also embraced
new endeavors: launching Juno, the first free email
service; and forming a joint venture with BankAmerica
Corporation to borrow $1.4 billion. D. E Shaw’s hedge
fund leveraged some of that money into a bond portfolio
worth $20 billion while pushing into still more new
businesses, such as an internet bank.9 Flush with cash,
Shaw hired over six hundred employees, housing them in
cutting-edge offices in New York, Tokyo, London, San
Francisco, Boston, and a spot in Hyderabad, India,
featuring a sculpture-filled atrium.
Then came the market turmoil of the fall of 1998.
Within months, D. E. Shaw had suffered over $200
million in losses in its bond portfolio, forcing it to fire 25

percent of its employees and retrench its operations. D.
E. Shaw would recover and reemerge as a trading power,
but its troubles, along with LTCM’s huge losses, provided
lasting lessons for Simons and Renaissance.

=
Patterson and others dissected their rivals’ sudden
setbacks. Medallion gained 42 percent in 1998, and the
fund benefited as other investors panicked in the fall, but
Patterson had to make sure his firm wasn’t making the
same mistakes as LTCM. Patterson knew Renaissance
didn’t borrow as much money as Meriwether’s firm, and
LTCM’s trades needed to work within a certain time
frame, unlike those favored by Simons. Renaissance
hired mathematicians and computer scientists, not
economists, another factor that distinguished it from
LTCM.
Still, there were enough similarities to warrant a
search for deeper lessons. For Patterson and his
colleagues, the LTCM collapse reinforced an existing
mantra at Renaissance: Never place too much trust in
trading models. Yes, the firm’s system seemed to work,
but all formulas are fallible. This conclusion reinforced
the fund’s approach to managing risk. If a strategy wasn’t
working, or when market volatility surged, Renaissance’s
system tended to automatically reduce positions and
risk. For example, Medallion cut its futures trading by 25
percent in the fall of 1998. By contrast, when LTCM’s
strategies floundered, the firm often grew their size,
rather than pull back.
“LTCM’s basic error was believing its models were
truth,” Patterson says. “We never believed our models
reflected reality—just some aspects of reality.”
D. E. Shaw and LTCM also had drifted into markets
the firms didn’t fully understand or had little experience
in—Danish mortgages! Online banking! It was a

reminder for Simons’s team of the need to hone their
approach, not enter new businesses.

=
For all of the work Brown, Mercer, and others had put
into their system, stock trading still contributed only
about 10 percent of the firm’s profits in 1998. It was
Henry Laufer’s futures trades that powered Renaissance,
even as Simons pushed the equities team to improve
their performance. As usual, David Magerman wanted to
be the hero who would change all that.
Magerman had been the one who managed to locate
and fix the computer bug that had prevented Brown and
Mercer’s stock-trading system from profiting.
Subsequently, Magerman was given more responsibility,
emerging as the architect of the software Medallion used
for its production, or its actual stock trades. Now he was
the watchdog of all changes to the system, a crucial
player in all its improvements, and the boss of a dozen
PhDs.
Magerman was on a clear roll. He was well paid.
Even better, his work garnered treasured praise from
Brown, Mercer, and Simons. Magerman used his
swelling pay to upgrade his wardrobe and even began
wearing suspenders, trying to look like Mercer. Winning
approval from dominant male figures had long
motivated Magerman, and the appreciation he was
receiving thrilled him.
Despite his growing success, Magerman detected a
certain iciness from Mercer’s family, especially Mercer’s
middle daughter Rebekah, who had joined Renaissance
and worked for Magerman. There were no more outings
to restaurants or invitations to the Mercer home,
perplexing Magerman. At one point, he wrote a five-page
letter, hoping to renew the friendship, but he got no
reply. He couldn’t figure out what had happened. He

examined the possibilities. Perhaps it was the time he
publicly berated Rebekah—his boss’s daughter, mind you
—over her work in the trading group, embarrassing
Rebekah in front of her new colleagues.
“I thought it was well deserved,” Magerman says.
The rift also could have resulted from the firm’s
summer outing, when Magerman took Heather Sue out
for a romantic canoe ride, a move he was sure had left
Bekah jealous. For whatever reason, Mercer’s daughters
and his wife, Diana, now wouldn’t speak to him.
“I was persona non grata in their house and at
family-hosted events,” he says.
To stay in Robert Mercer’s good graces, Magerman
decided to focus on his work. In 1999, Magerman
developed a way to tweak the computer code governing
the firm’s stock trading, making it more efficient. Almost
immediately, however, Medallion’s futures trades went
from winners to losers. Staffers scrambled to understand
what had happened, but Magerman knew—he had made
a careless mistake and unleashed a powerful bug that
was infecting the firm, once again.
I caused this!
For weeks, Magerman beat himself up, wondering
how he could have committed such a dumb error. True,
Magerman’s stock-trading group didn’t share much
computer code with Henry Laufer’s futures staffers, but
Magerman was sure he somehow was the culprit.
Unwilling to acknowledge his mistake this time,
Magerman worked through the night, but failed to find
his bug.
As the quarter ended, Medallion told clients it had
suffered a slight but surprising loss, its first quarterly
downturn in a decade. Racked with worry and waiting to
be fired, Magerman could hardly sleep.
“I was losing my mind,” he says.

Magerman met with a therapist who diagnosed
generalized anxiety disorder, starting him on weekly
sessions to calm his nerves. Slowly, Medallion’s returns
rebounded and Magerman allowed himself to relax,
concluding that he probably hadn’t been responsible for
the losses, after all.
In January 2000, Medallion surged 10.5 percent, the
hedge fund’s best one-month return in years. By early
March, the fund was sitting on over $700 million of
profits as the Nasdaq Composite index reached a record
amid a wave of enthusiasm for technology stocks,
especially internet-related companies.
Then came true trouble for Magerman and his
colleagues. The tech bubble burst on March 10, sending
shares plummeting, with little news to account for the
shift in sentiment. A month later, the Nasdaq would be
down 25 percent, on its way to a full 78 percent drop
from its peak. Medallion faced inexplicable losses. It lost
about $90 million in a single day in March; the next day
it was $80 million more. Nerves began to fray—until
then, Medallion had never lost more than $5 million in a
day.
It wasn’t just the mounting losses that had everyone
concerned—it was the uncertainty over why things were
so bad. The Medallion portfolio held commodities,
currencies, and bond futures, and its stock portfolio was
largely composed of offsetting positions aimed at
sidestepping broad market moves. The losses shouldn’t
be happening. But because so many of the system’s
trading signals had developed on their own through a
form of machine learning, it was hard to pinpoint the
exact cause of the problems or when they might ebb; the
machines seemed out of control.
Amid the sell-off, a recruit visited the Long Island
office to interview with Patterson and several colleagues.
When they met to discuss the candidacy the next
morning, not a single person remembered even meeting

the recruit. The losses had left the researchers in an utter
daze.
Mercer remained stoic, interacting with colleagues as
if nothing unusual was happening. Not Brown. He had
never experienced deep, sudden losses, and it showed.
High-strung and emotional, Brown couldn’t hide his
building fears. Unable to sleep, Brown spent the night
checking his computer to get updates on the troubles.
Around the office, Brown looked pale, his lack of sleep
showing, shocking colleagues. Friends said he felt
responsible for the losses since they emanated from his
stock-trading system.
On the third day of the meltdown, Magerman drove
to work, checked the level of stock futures on his
computer, and received a fresh jolt—another absolutely
awful day was ahead. Magerman turned slightly
nauseous. Brown and Mercer were already in an
emergency meeting with Simons and other top
executives, but Magerman felt the need to alert them to
the escalating problems. He slowly opened a heavy door
to a small, cramped conference room packed with a
dozen executives, a videoconference screen showing the
faces of others around the globe. At the head of a long
table sat Simons, grim and focused. Magerman bent low,
whispering into Brown’s ear: “We’re down another
ninety million.”
Brown froze. Medallion’s losses now approached
$300 million. Brown was distraught, even fearful. He
looked at Simons, desperate for help.
“Jim, what should we do?”
Simons tried to reassure Brown and the other
executives, expressing confidence their fortunes would
improve.
“Trust the model,” Simons told them. “We have to let
it ride; we can’t panic.”

Later, Simons reminded staffers that their trading
system was prepared for trying times. Besides, there was
little they could do; Medallion trades about eight
thousand stocks. There was no way they could quickly
revamp the portfolio.
After several more all-nighters, a couple of
researchers developed a theory about what was causing
the problems: A once-trusted strategy was bleeding
money. It was a rather simple strategy—if certain stocks
rallied in previous weeks, Medallion’s system had taught
itself to buy more of those shares, under the assumption
the surge would continue. For several years, this
trending signal had worked, as the fund automatically
bought Nasdaq shares that were racing still higher. Now
the system’s algorithms were instructing Medallion to
buy more shares, even though a vicious bear market had
begun.
Simons often emphasized the importance of not
overriding their trading system, but, in a market crisis,
he tended to pull back on the reliance on certain signals,
to the chagrin of researchers who didn’t believe in ever
adjusting their computer programs. Now even those
staffers were fine dumping their faulty signal, especially
since their system did a better job predicting short-term
moves, not the longer-term ones on which the defective
signal focused. They quickly ditched the momentum
strategy, stemming the losses. Soon, gains were piling up
once again.
Brown remained shaken, though. He offered to
resign, feeling responsible for the deep pain. Simons
rejected the offer, telling Brown he was even more
valuable now that he had learned “never to put your full
faith in a model.”10

=

By the fall of 2000, word of Medallion’s success was
starting to leak out. That year, Medallion soared 99
percent, even after it charged clients 20 percent of their
gains and 5 percent of the money invested with Simons.
The firm now managed nearly $4 billion. Over the
previous decade, Medallion and its 140 employees had
enjoyed a better performance than funds managed by
George Soros, Julian Robertson, Paul Tudor Jones, and
other investing giants. Just as impressive, Medallion had
recorded a Sharpe ratio of 2.5 in its most recent five-year
period, suggesting the fund’s gains came with low
volatility and risk compared with those of many
competitors.
Letting his guard down, Simons consented to an
interview with Hal Lux, a writer at Institutional Investor
magazine. Over coffee in his New York office, and later
while sipping gin and tonics at Renaissance’s Long
Island headquarters, Simons expressed confidence his
gains would continue.
“The things we are doing will not go away,” Simons
told Lux. “We may have bad years, we may have a
terrible year sometimes, but the principles we’ve
discovered are valid.”
Brown, Mercer, and Laufer were just as confident
that a rare, even historic, opportunity was at hand. They
pushed to hire new employees to take advantage.
“The markets are dripping with inefficiencies,” a
senior staffer told a colleague. “We’re leaving money on
the table.”
The new hires would transform the firm in ways
Simons and his colleagues never could have anticipated.

PA R T T W O

Money Changes Everything

C H A P T E R T W E LV E

S fund in 2001.

omething unusual was going on at Jim Simons’s hedge

Profits were piling up as Renaissance began digesting
new kinds of information. The team collected every trade
order, including those that hadn’t been completed, along
with annual and quarterly earnings reports, records of
stock trades by corporate executives, government
reports, and economic predictions and papers.
Simons wanted more. “Can we do anything with
news flashes?” he asked in a group meeting.
Soon, researchers were tracking newspaper and
newswire stories, internet posts, and more obscure data
—such as offshore insurance claims—racing to get their
hands on pretty much any information that could be
quantified and scrutinized for its predictive value. The
Medallion fund became something of a data sponge,
soaking up a terabyte, or one trillion bytes, of
information annually, buying expensive disk drives and
processors to digest, store, and analyze it all, looking for
reliable patterns.
“There’s no data like more data,” Mercer told a
colleague, an expression that became the firm’s hokey
mantra.
Renaissance’s goal was to predict the price of a stock
or other investment “at every point in the future,” Mercer
later explained. “We want to know in three seconds,
three days, three weeks, and three months.”
If there was a newspaper article about a shortage of
bread in Serbia, for example, Renaissance’s computers

would sift through past examples of bread shortages and
rising wheat prices to see how various investments
reacted, Mercer said.1
Some of the new information, such as quarterly
corporate earnings reports, didn’t provide much of an
advantage. But data on the earnings predictions of stock
analysts and their changing views on companies
sometimes helped. Watching for patterns in how stocks
traded following earnings announcements, and tracking
corporate cash flows, research-and-development
spending, share issuance, and other factors, also proved
to be useful activities. The team improved its predictive
algorithms by developing a rather simple measure of
how many times a company was mentioned in a news
feed—no matter if the mentions were positive, negative,
or even pure rumors.
It became clear to Mercer and others that trading
stocks bore similarities to speech recognition, which was
part of why Renaissance continued to raid IBM’s
computational linguistics team. In both endeavors, the
goal was to create a model capable of digesting uncertain
jumbles of information and generating reliable guesses
about what might come next—while ignoring
traditionalists who employed analysis that wasn’t nearly
as data driven.
As more trading became electronic, with human
market-makers and middlemen elbowed out of the
business, Medallion spread its moves among an
expanding number of electronic networks, making it
easier and more efficient to buy and sell. Finally, Simons
was close to his original goal of building a fully
automated system with little human interface.
Staffers became excited about developing supershort-term signals to trade in a matter of seconds, or
even less, a method that would become known as highfrequency trading. Renaissance’s computers proved too
slow to beat others to the market, however. Medallion

made between 150,000 and 300,000 trades a day, but
much of that activity entailed buying or selling in small
chunks to avoid impacting the market prices, rather than
profiting by stepping in front of other investors. What
Simons and his team were doing wasn’t quite investing,
but they also weren’t flash boys.
Whatever you wanted to call it, the results were
extraordinary. After soaring 98.5 percent in 2000, the
Medallion fund rose 33 percent in 2001. By comparison,
the S&P 500, the commonly used barometer of the stock
market, managed a measly average gain of 0.2 percent
over those two years, while rival hedge funds gained 7.3
percent.
Simons’s team was still flying under the radar of
most in the investing world. As the Institutional Investor
article in 2000 said, “Chances are you haven’t heard of
Jim Simons, which is fine by him. Nor are you alone.”2
Still, Brown and Mercer’s system worked so well that
researchers could test and develop new algorithms and
plop them into their existing, single trading system. New
employees began identifying predictive signals in
markets in Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, and Hong Kong, as well as in smaller locales,
including Finland, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.
Foreign markets usually follow the US, but they don’t
move in lockstep. By combining signals from these new
markets with Medallion’s existing predictive algorithms
in one main trading system, something remarkable
seemed to happen. The correlations of Medallion’s trades
to the overall market dropped, smoothing out returns
and making them less connected to key financial
markets.
Investment professionals generally judge a
portfolio’s risk by its Sharpe ratio, which measures
returns in relation to volatility; the higher one’s Sharpe,
the better. For most of the 1990s, Medallion had a strong
Sharpe ratio of about 2.0, double the level of the S&P

500. But adding foreign-market algorithms and
improving Medallion’s trading techniques sent its Sharpe
soaring to about 6.0 in early 2003, about twice the ratio
of the largest quant firms and a figure suggesting there
was nearly no risk of the fund losing money over a whole
year.
Simons’s team appeared to have discovered
something of a holy grail in investing: enormous returns
from a diversified portfolio generating relatively little
volatility and correlation to the overall market. In the
past, a few others had developed investment vehicles
with similar characteristics. They usually had puny
portfolios, however. No one had achieved what Simons
and his team had—a portfolio as big as $5 billion
delivering this kind of astonishing performance.
The accomplishment opened the door to new
possibilities.

=
Peter Brown paced his office, determined to find a way to
expand the hedge fund’s equity bets. Brown remained
haunted by the painful losses of early 2000, however,
and how flummoxed he had been about how to react. He
wanted a way to protect the firm in case of an even
greater market catastrophe.
Brown was in luck—banks were warming to
Renaissance, sensing opportunity. In many ways,
Simons’s firm was a dream borrower, with returns that
were huge, placid, and uncorrelated to the broader
market. Simons had okayed Brown’s plan to use more
leverage to amplify its profits, making Renaissance an
eager borrower. (Just as homeowners take out mortgages
to buy homes that are more expensive than they can
afford with the money they have in the bank, so too do
hedge funds like Medallion, as a way to boost profits,

borrow money to accumulate larger investment
portfolios than their capital would allow.)
Banks were loosening purse strings and lending
standards. Global interest rates were falling, the housing
market was revving up, and lenders were offering an
array of aggressive loans, even for borrowers with
scuffed or no credit history. By comparison, Renaissance
seemed a safe bet, especially since it generally held an
equal number of long and short trades, reducing
potential risk in a market tumble. That’s part of why
Deutsche Bank and Barclays Bank began selling the
hedge fund a new product called basket options that
seemed a perfect solution to Brown’s problems.
Basket options are financial instruments whose
values are pegged to the performance of a specific basket
of stocks. While most options are valued based on an
individual stock or financial instrument, basket options
are linked to a group of shares. If these underlying stocks
rise, the value of the option goes up—it’s like owning the
shares without actually doing so. Indeed, the banks were
legal owners of shares in the basket, but, for all intents
and purposes, they were Medallion’s property. The
fund’s computers told the banks which stocks to place in
the basket and how they should be traded. Brown
himself helped create the code to make it all happen. All
day, Medallion’s computers sent automated instructions
to the banks, sometimes an order a minute or even a
second. After a year or so, Medallion exercised its
options, claiming whatever returns the shares generated,
less some related costs.3
The basket options were a crafty way to supercharge
Medallion’s returns. Brokerage and other restrictions
place limits on how much a hedge fund can borrow
through more traditional loans, but the options gave
Medallion the ability to borrow significantly more than it
otherwise was allowed to. Competitors generally had
about seven dollars of financial instruments for each

dollar of cash. By contrast, Medallion’s options strategy
allowed it to have $12.50 worth of financial instruments
for every dollar of cash, making it easier to trounce the
rivals, assuming it could keep finding profitable trades.
When Medallion spied especially juicy opportunities,
such as during a 2002 market downturn, the fund could
boost its leverage, holding close to $20 of assets for each
dollar of cash, effectively placing the portfolio on
steroids. In 2002, Medallion managed over $5 billion,
but it controlled more than $60 billion of investment
positions, thanks in part to the options helping the fund
score a gain of 25.8 percent despite a tough year for the
broader market. (The S&P 500 lost 22.1 percent in 2002,
a year marked by the bankruptcies of internet companies
and reverberations from the collapse of the trading and
energy company Enron and the telecommunications
giant WorldCom.)
The options also were a way of shifting enormous
risk from Renaissance to the banks. Because the lenders
technically owned the underlying securities in the
basket-options transactions, the most Medallion could
lose in the event of a sudden collapse was the premium it
had paid for the options and the collateral held by the
banks. That amounted to several hundred million
dollars. By contrast, the banks faced billions of dollars of
potential losses if Medallion were to experience deep
troubles. In the words of a banker involved in the lending
arrangement, the options allowed Medallion to “ringfence” its stock portfolios, protecting other parts of the
firm, including Laufer’s still-thriving futures trading, and
ensuring Renaissance’s survival in the event something
unforeseen took place. One staffer was so shocked by the
terms of the financing that he shifted most of his life
savings into Medallion, realizing the most he could lose
was about 20 percent of his money.
The banks embraced the serious risk despite having
ample reason to be wary. For one thing, they had no clue

why Medallion’s strategies worked. And the fund only
had a decade of impressive returns. In addition, LongTerm Capital Management had imploded just a few years
earlier, providing a stark lesson regarding the dangers of
relying on murky models.
Brown realized there was another huge benefit to the
basket options: They enabled Medallion’s trades to
become eligible for the more favorable long-term capital
gains tax, even though many of them lasted for just days
or even hours. That’s because the options were exercised
after a year, allowing Renaissance to argue they were
long-term in nature. (Short-term gains are taxed at a rate
of 39.5 percent while long-term gains face a 20 percent
tax.)
Some staffers were uncomfortable with the
stratagem, calling it “legal but wrong,” but Brown and
others relied on the thumbs-up they received from legal
advisors. Several years later, the Internal Revenue
Service would rule that Medallion had improperly
claimed profits from the basket options as long-term
gains. Simons, who had approved the transactions, along
with other Renaissance executives, paid a whopping $6.8
billion less in taxes than they should have, the IRS said.
In 2014, a Senate subcommittee said Renaissance had
“misused” the complex structures “to claim billions of
dollars in unjustified tax savings.” Renaissance
challenged the IRS’s finding and the dispute was still
ongoing as of the summer of 2019.
Other hedge funds crafted their own ways to reduce
taxes, some using versions of the basket-options
agreements. No one relied on them like Renaissance,
though. By the early 2000s, the options had emerged as
the firm’s secret weapon, so important that Renaissance
dedicated several computer programmers and about fifty
staff members to ensuring a seamless coordination with
the banks.

=
Money is seductive, even to scientists and
mathematicians. Slowly, Renaissance staffers, even those
who once had been abashed about making so much cash,
began to enjoy their winnings. A staffer developed a
widget so they could see a running tally of their profits
(and, once in a while, losses) in the corner of their
computer screens. Moods began to shift with the
changing figures.
“It was a rush,” an employee says. “But it also was
distracting.”
Their spending picked up along with the returns. So
many scientists bought mansions in a nearby area called
Old Field that it became known as the Renaissance
Riviera. Simons had his fourteen-acre estate in East
Setauket overlooking Long Island Sound, his picture
windows providing a spectacular view of the herons on
Conscious Bay. Henry Laufer paid nearly $2 million for a
nearby five-bedroom, six-and-a-half-bathroom,
Mediterranean-style estate on almost ten acres, with
more than four hundred feet of his own frontage on the
Sound. Laufer spent another $800,000 to buy an
adjacent 2.6-acre parcel, combining them into a megaproperty. In the same area, Simons’s cousin, Robert
Lourie, who had left academia for a senior position at the
hedge fund, built an equestrian arena for his daughter,
with arches so large a bridge into New York City had to
be shut down to facilitate their journey to Long Island.4
Mercer’s mansion was down a long dirt road with
sand on all sides, overlooking Stony Brook Harbor. He
and Diana decorated their living room with full-length
portraits of their daughters, Heather Sue, Rebekah, and
Jenji.5 When the family hosted Heather Sue’s blowout
wedding, guests gawked at the colossal water fountain
and gorgeous rose garden, while stepping around
thousands of dead bugs killed for their comfort on the

eve of the event. (There were so many pictures and
videos of Bob and Heather Sue some guests joked they
weren’t sure who the groom was.)
Porsches, Mercedes, and other upscale cars took up
more space in Renaissance’s parking lot, though
Tauruses and Camrys still abounded. Some executives
even took helicopters to dinner in New York City.6 In the
lunchroom, someone affixed a number to an office
refrigerator—the percentage of his compensation’s most
recent annual gain. When it fell, he told friends, he was
going to quit.
One day, as a few researchers sat around
complaining about all the taxes they were paying,
Simons walked past, a frown quickly forming on his face.
“If you didn’t make so much money, you wouldn’t
pay so much in taxes,” Simons said, before wandering
away.
They were getting so wealthy—researchers and
others were paid millions or even tens of millions of
dollars each year, and they were making just as much
from their investments in Medallion—that some felt a
need to justify the gains. The Renaissance staff was
largely former academics, after all, and some couldn’t
help question the outsize compensation.
Do I deserve all this money?
Most employees concluded that their heavy trading
was adding to the market’s liquidity, or the ability of
investors to get in and out of positions easily, helping the
financial system, though that argument was a bit of a
stretch since it wasn’t clear how much overall impact
Renaissance was having. Others committed to giving
their money away after they had built a sufficient
treasure chest, while trying not to focus on how their
expanding profits necessarily meant dentists and other
investors were losing from their trades.

“There was internal struggle,” says Glen Whitney, the
senior executive who helped facilitate the firm’s research.
Brown had mixed feelings about his own
accumulating riches. He had long battled anxieties about
money, colleagues said, so he relished the big bucks. But
Brown tried to shield his children from the magnitude of
his wealth, driving a Prius and sometimes wearing
clothing with holes. His wife, who had taken a job as a
scientist at a foundation dedicated to reducing the threat
from nuclear weapons, rarely spent money on herself.
Still, it became hard to mask the money. Colleagues
shared a story that once, when the Brown family visited
Mercer’s mansion, Brown’s son, then in grade school, got
a look at the scale of the Mercer home and turned to his
father, a look of confusion on his face.
“Dad, don’t you and Bob do the same thing?”

=
As their stock-trading business thrived, Brown and
Mercer assumed greater influence at the firm, while
Laufer’s power waned. The two groups seemed to
operate at entirely different levels of urgency, just like
their leaders. Laufer remained calm and measured, no
matter the market. Members of his team came in, drank
a cup of coffee or two, perused the Financial Times, and
got to work. Their software was a bit clunky at times,
unable to quickly test and implement trade ideas or
discover lots of new relationships and patterns, but the
returns remained strong, even if they were stagnating.
Laufer’s gang never fully understood why Simons needed
to grow the fund, anyway. They all were making millions
of dollars each year, so what was the big problem?
Brown and Mercer’s staffers often spent the night
programming their computers, competing to see who
could stay in the office longest, then rushing back in the
morning to see how effective their changes had been. If

Brown was going to push himself all day and sleep by his
computer keyboard at night, his underlings felt the need
to keep up. Brown disparaged his researchers,
developing demeaning nicknames for everyone in the
group (other than Mercer) and prodded each for even
greater effort. But his staffers developed a certain pride
in knowing they could handle his insults, and they
assumed he mostly used them as motivational tools.
Brown himself often looked pained, as if he wore the
weight of the world on his shoulders, suggesting he cared
as much as anyone about the work. He also could be
exuberant and entertaining. A huge fan of Candide,
Brown liked to sprinkle references to the French satire in
his presentations, making staffers chuckle.
Quietly, the team worked on a souped-up trading
model capable of replacing the one used by the futures
team. When they presented it to Simons, he was
unhappy they had built their model in secret, but he
agreed it should replace the one Laufer’s team was using.
By 2003, the profits of Brown and Mercer’s stocktrading group were twice those of Laufer’s futures team,
a remarkable shift in just a few years. Rewarding his
ascending stars, Simons announced that Brown and
Mercer would become executive vice presidents of the
entire firm, co-managing all of Renaissance’s trading,
research, and technical activities. Once, Laufer had
seemed Simons’s obvious heir apparent. Now he was
given the title of chief scientist and tasked with dealing
with the firm’s problem areas, among other things.
Brown and Mercer were the firm’s future. Laufer was its
past.
Over a lunch of cheeseburgers at Billie’s 1890, a
wood-paneled saloon in nearby Port Jefferson, Simons
told Brown and Mercer he was thinking about retiring.
“You’ll take over,” Simons told them, saying he
wanted them to become co-CEOs.7

As word leaked out, some employees began to panic.
Brown’s team could handle his invective, but others
couldn’t stand the guy. Once, on the phone with an
employee in the New York office where Renaissance
handled its accounting and investors relations duties,
Brown lashed out in irritation.
“You’re just stupid!”
As for Mercer, while he continued to have regular
conversations with Brown, he rarely said anything in
group settings. When he did, it often was to inflame.
Mercer had long enjoyed debating underlings. Now he
appeared to be outright provoking them, usually while in
the Renaissance lunchroom. Often, Mercer zeroed in on
left-leaning colleagues, chiefly Nick Patterson, a habit
staffers began to refer to as “Nick-baiting.”
Patterson generally enjoyed the back-and-forth.
Sometimes it went a bit overboard, though. One day,
Mercer insisted to Patterson that climate-change worries
were overblown, handing him a research paper written
by a biochemist named Arthur Robinson and some
others. Patterson took the paper home and studied it; it
turned out Robinson was also a sheep rancher who
cofounded a project to stockpile and then analyze
thousands of vials of urine, “to improve our health, our
happiness and prosperity, and even the academic
performance of our children in school.”8 After reading
the paper, Patterson sent Mercer a note that it was
“probably false and certainly politically illiterate.”
Mercer never responded.
Mercer especially liked quantifying things, as if the
only way to measure accomplishments, costs, and much
else in society was through numbers, usually dollars and
cents.
“Why do we need more than fines to punish people?”
he asked Whitney, the senior computer executive, whom
Mercer also enjoyed baiting.

“What are you talking about?” Whitney responded.
Some of Mercer’s comments were downright
abhorrent. Once, Magerman recalls, Mercer tried to
quantify how much money the government spent on
African Americans in criminal prosecution, schooling,
welfare payments, and more, and whether the money
could be used, instead, to encourage a return to Africa.
(Mercer later denied making the comment.)
Oddly, Mercer was a scientist who demanded robust
arguments and definitive proof at the office, but he relied
on flimsy data when it came to his personal views. One
day, Mercer brought in research that purported to show
that exposure to radiation had extended the lives of those
living outside Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the years after
the US dropped atomic bombs on the cities, suggesting
to him that nuclear war wasn’t nearly as worrisome as
widely assumed. The paper struck the researchers as
unconvincing pseudoscience.
Mercer was the most senior person in the
lunchroom, so some staffers bit their tongues, unwilling
to challenge the boss. Once, Mercer told a young
researcher and avowed atheist he didn’t believe in
evolution, handing him a book that argued for
creationism, though Mercer himself wasn’t a believer in
the divine.
“There isn’t enough time” to judge evolution’s
accuracy, Mercer told the employee.
To most of the staff, even the targets of his baiting,
Mercer was a provocateur. Occasionally amusing, often
annoying, but generally harmless. Their perspective
would change.

=
Simons wasn’t ready to pass the baton to Brown and
Mercer, but he assigned them more responsibilities,

sometimes pulling the pair away from day-to-day
trading. A new set of employees began to assert
themselves, changing the company in fundamental ways.
Eager to expand in the late 1990s and early 2000s,
Renaissance sometimes deviated from its usual practice
by hiring employees who had been at rival firms, many of
whom were scientists with roots in Russia and Eastern
Europe. Among them was Alexander Belopolsky, who
had spent time at a unit of D. E. Shaw, the quant hedge
fund. It was a hiring decision that Nick Patterson had
protested. It wasn’t just that Belopolsky had worked on
Wall Street. He fielded tough questions in his interview
at Renaissance a bit too smoothly, Patterson felt, as if he
had been coached.
Other foreign-born scientists also demonstrated an
uncanny ability to ace the kinds of challenging questions
that usually stumped interviewees. After Whitney posed
his favorite problem to a job candidate, he began
receiving the same response: a dramatic pause, apparent
confusion, then, suddenly, a stroke of brilliance and an
absolutely beautiful solution.
“Oh, I have it!”
Later, Whitney realized someone had been feeding
answers to the foreign-born recruits.
“They were real actors,” Whitney says. “I felt like a
stooge.”
Medallion employees made an absolute fortune, but
because the fund’s size was capped at about $5 billion in
2003, staffers sometimes found it challenging to grow
their compensation, leading to some tension. On Wall
Street, traders often are most miserable after terrific
years, not terrible ones, as resentments emerge—yes, I
made a ton, but someone wholly undeserving got more!
At Renaissance, some of the newcomers launched
whisper campaigns against well-paid colleagues,

including Peter Weinberger, a legendary computer
scientist. In 1996, Simons had hired Weinberger to work
with Laufer in futures trading. A former head of
computer-science research at Bell Labs, Weinberger was
famous for helping to develop the programming
language called AWK (the W represented his last name).
Behind his back, newcomers questioned Weinberger,
saying his technique was antiquated and that he wasn’t
contributing.
“Yeah, he’s famous, but what does he do?” one
sniffed. (Weinberger left the firm in 2003.)
Some veterans had sympathy for the new staffers
despite their rough edges. Many had spent formative
years living under communist rule, so it was
understandable they’d be less open and trusting, the
defenders argued. Sometimes, the foreign-born scientists
shared tales about enduring hardship in their youth. And
it wasn’t like every member of the new breed was dissing
older colleagues.
The tenor of the firm was changing, though, and
nervousness grew.

=
David Magerman was unhappy, once again. Never one to
keep his opinions to himself, he wasn’t going to start
now.
First there was Simons’s smoking. Yes, Simons was
the pioneer of quantitative investing, a billionaire, and
the founder and majority owner of his firm. But come on,
enough with the smoking! Magerman felt it was
exacerbating his asthma, leaving him coughing after
meetings. He was determined to do something about it.
This is too much!
“Jim, I called human resources to file an OSHA
complaint,” Magerman told Simons one day, referring to

the federal agency governing workplace violations. “This
is illegal.”
Magerman said he’d no longer attend meetings if
Simons kept smoking. Simons got the message and
purchased a machine that sucked cigarette smoke from
the air, which was enough to get Magerman to end his
mini-boycott.
Simons still employed a few old-school traders,
something else that bothered Magerman. Simons
believed in computer trading, but he didn’t entirely trust
an automated system in unstable markets, a stance
Magerman couldn’t understand. Sometimes, Magerman
threw things to express his irritation—usually cans of
Diet Coke, once a computer monitor. Eventually, Brown
convinced Magerman the issue wasn’t worth fighting
over.
Others at the firm became animated over more trivial
issues. A few miles from Renaissance’s East Setauket
headquarters, close by West Meadow Beach, the longest
public beach north of Florida, stood a row of ninety
cottages. Renaissance employees owned some of the
ramshackle wooden bungalows, which enjoyed views of
Stony Brook Harbor. The firm also owned a cottage.
They’d been built on illegally acquired public land,
though, and the city made plans to demolish them. When
a group emerged, backed by Renaissance staffers, to keep
the cottages in private hands, Whitney, a former math
professor who joined the company in 1997, became
outraged. He started a website to support the city’s
demolition, while Magerman printed and handed out
bumper stickers that said—“Dump the Shacks!”
“It’s just wrong,” Whitney insisted in the lunchroom.
“It’s a public park!”
Mercer took an opposing stance, of course.
“What’s the big deal?” Mercer asked, needling
Whitney and others.

Tensions grew; at one point, some Renaissance
employees wouldn’t let their kids play with Whitney’s
children. More than flimsy cottages seemed at stake—
Whitney and others sensed Renaissance was shifting
amid the influx of new staffers, becoming a less caring
and collegial place. The shacks came down, but the anger
lingered.
In 2002, Simons increased Medallion’s investor fees
to 36 percent of each year’s profits, raising hackles
among some clients. A bit later, the firm boosted the fees
to 44 percent. Then, in early 2003, Simons began kicking
all his investors out of the fund. Simons had worried that
performance would ebb if Medallion grew too big, and he
preferred that he and his employees kept all the gains.
But some investors had stuck with Medallion through
difficult periods and were crushed.
Whitney, Magerman, and others argued against the
move. To them, it was one more indication that the
firm’s priorities were changing.

=
Among the most ambitious of the new employees was a
mathematician and Ukraine native named Alexey
Kononenko. At the age of sixteen, Kononenko earned a
spot at Moscow State University, moving to Moscow to
study pure mathematics at the famed university. In 1991,
before he could complete his studies, Kononenko and his
family fled the USSR, joining a wave of emigrants
impacted by the nation’s rampant anti-Semitism.
In 1996, Kononenko received his PhD from Penn
State, where he studied with respected geometer and
fellow Russian immigrant Anatole Katok. Later,
Kononenko did postdoc work at the University of
Pennsylvania. With colleagues, he wrote a dozen
research papers, some of which proved influential,
including one addressing the trajectory of billiard balls.

Confident and outgoing, Kononenko was offered a
coveted postdoc position at the Mathematical Sciences
Research Institute, the renowned institution in Berkeley,
California. When a colleague wished Kononenko
congratulations, however, the young man appeared
disappointed with his new position, rather than
delighted.
“Alex was hoping to get a tenure track offer from
Princeton, Harvard, or the University of Chicago, which
wasn’t realistic at that point,” recalls a fellow academic.
“He had achieved an awful lot, but he could have had
more perspective and patience.”
Kononenko seemed to place a greater priority on
money than his peers did, perhaps because he was
focused on achieving financial security after dealing with
challenging circumstances in the Soviet Union. They
weren’t shocked when Kononenko quit academia to join
Renaissance. There, Kononenko quickly rose through the
ranks, playing a key role in various breakthroughs in
foreign-stock trading. By 2002, Kononenko—who was
thin, clean-shaven, and good-looking, with hair that
showed signs of gray at the temples—was pocketing well
over $40 million a year, colleagues estimated, about half
from his pay and half from investing in Medallion. He
used some of his winnings to build an impressive art
collection.
Despite their mounting wealth, Kononenko and
some of his newer colleagues grew unhappy. They
complained that there were too many “deadwood”
employees who weren’t pulling their weight and were
being paid way too much.
“What do they even contribute?” a newcomer was
overheard asking about some of Renaissance’s senior
executives.
Some even viewed Brown and Mercer as expendable.
By then, Brown’s intense pace and nonstop typing had

caught up with him—he suffered from carpal tunnel
syndrome and sometimes seemed discouraged, likely
due to his inability to put in the same hours on his
computer. Mercer suffered from joint pain and
sometimes missed work. Kononenko was heard badmouthing Brown and Mercer, one veteran recalls. After
he discovered an error in the construction of the stock
portfolio, Kononenko raised questions about whether
Brown and Mercer should be running the company,
Brown told at least one person. Simons defended the
executives but word spread of Kononenko’s boldness.
Complaints even emerged about Simons, who was
spending less time around the office, yet still received
about half the firm’s profits.
“He doesn’t do anything anymore,” a staffer griped to
Magerman one day in a hallway. “He’s screwing us.”
Magerman couldn’t believe what he was hearing.
“He’s earned the right” to his enormous pay,
Magerman responded.
Soon, Kononenko was pushing a plan to shift points
from Simons and members of the old guard to deserving
newcomers and others. The idea divided the firm but
Simons agreed to implement a reallocation. Even that
didn’t quell the grumbling, however.
The firm was changing, partly because some
longtime staffers were leaving. After nearly a decade
scrutinizing market patterns, Nick Patterson quit to join
an institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and analyze
another kind of complicated data—the human genome—
to gain a better understanding of human biology.
Soon, there was a Lord of the Flies feel to the place.
Veterans worried that newcomers were targeting those at
the firm with a lot of points, or equity, in the firm to free
up money for themselves. Some of the Eastern
Europeans liked to stay late at the office, charging the

company for dinner while discussing why Simons and
others were paid too much, employees say. The next day,
they’d gang up to mock the work done by others in the
equities group.
Quietly, two senior scientists on Brown and Mercer’s
stock team—Belopolsky, the former D. E. Shaw
executive, and a colleague named Pavel Volfbeyn—began
clandestine discussions to quit. Earlier, Renaissance’s
human-resources staff had made a crucial mistake.
When Belopolsky and Volfbeyn became principals of the
firm, they had been given nondisclosure and
noncompete agreements. The pair hadn’t signed the
noncompete agreements, though, and no one had
noticed. It gave them an opening.
In July 2003, Belopolsky and Volfbeyn delivered a
bombshell: They were joining Millennium Management,
a rival firm run by billionaire hedge-fund manager Israel
Englander, who had promised them the chance to make
an even larger fortune.
Simons was gripped with fear, worried that
Belopolsky and Volfbeyn had millions of lines of
Medallion’s source code. Simons was sure his secrets
were about to get out, crippling the hedge fund.
“They stole from us!” he told a colleague in anger.
Simons hardly had a chance to digest the departures
before he was confronted with true tragedy.

=
Nicholas Simons inherited his father’s love of adventure.
In 2002, a year after graduating from college, the young
man, Simons’s third-eldest son, took a job in
Kathmandu, Nepal’s capital, working with hydroelectric
power for the Nepalese government as a contractor for a
US consulting company. Nick fell in love with the city,

renowned as a gateway to the spectacular Himalayas and
a paradise for mountain trekkers.
Back on Long Island, Nick, who bore a resemblance
to his father and shared his passion for hiking, told his
parents he wanted to work in a Third World country,
perhaps opening a medical clinic in Nepal to help its
poorest residents. Nick would go on an around-theworld adventure with a friend and then return to learn
organic chemistry and apply to medical school.
A week before he was scheduled to come home, Nick
stopped in Amed, a long, coastal strip of fishing villages
in eastern Bali and a hub for freediving, an exhilarating
underwater sport in which divers hold their breath until
resurfacing, eschewing scuba gear. One warm July day,
Nick and his friend took turns diving one hundred feet
down, enjoying the sea’s clear, current-less conditions.
The friends spotted each other, one up, one down, a
freediving protocol meant to minimize the danger of the
pressure changes and other serious threats far below the
surface.
At one point, Nick’s partner’s mask fogged up, so he
swam ashore to adjust his gear. Gone for just five
minutes, he returned but couldn’t locate Nick. He was
found on the bottom of the sea. When Nick’s body was
brought to the surface, he couldn’t be resuscitated. In the
middle of the night, Jim and Marilyn were awoken by a
call from their son’s friend.
“Nick drowned,” he said.
At the funeral, Jim and Marilyn were inconsolable,
appearing pale and hollowed-out. The mourners’
darkness was amplified by a hard rainstorm that evening
and the kind of thunder and lightning a friend described
as “apocalyptic.”
Simons had an unswerving belief in logic, rationality,
and science. He had played the odds in his trading,
fighting a daily battle with chance, usually emerging

victorious. Now Simons had suffered two tragic,
unpredictable accidents. The events had been outliers,
unexpected and almost inconceivable. Simons had been
felled by randomness.
Simons struggled to comprehend how he could have
so much good fortune in his professional life, yet be so
ill-fated personally. As he sat shiva in his New York City
home, Robert Frey, the Renaissance executive, drew
Simons close, giving him a hug.
“Robert, my life is either aces or deuces,” Simons told
him. “I don’t understand.”
Seven years earlier, Paul’s sudden death had been a
crushing blow. Nick’s passing was just as painful. Now,
though, Simons’s grief was mixed with anger, friends say,
an emotion they rarely had seen in Simons. He turned
crusty, even ornery, with colleagues and others.
“He saw the death as a betrayal,” a friend says.
Dealing with intense pain, Jim and Marilyn spoke
about purchasing a large part of St. John, moving to the
island, and disappearing. Fitfully, they exited their
tailspin. In September, Jim, Marilyn, and other family
members traveled to Nepal for the first time, joining
some of Nick’s friends in searching for a way to continue
Nick’s legacy. Nick had been drawn to Kathmandu and
had an interest in medicine, so they funded a maternity
ward at a hospital in the city. Later, Jim and Marilyn
would start the Nick Simons Institute, which offers
health care assistance to those living in Nepal’s rural
areas, most of whom don’t have basic emergency
services.
At the office, Simons remained checked-out. For a
while, he contemplated retirement and spent time
working on mathematics problems with his friend
Dennis Sullivan, looking for an escape.

“It was a refuge. A quiet place in my head,” Simons
said.9
Renaissance executives couldn’t gain his attention,
creating a leadership void as the firm’s rifts grew. Longsimmering tensions were about to burst to the surface.

=
Brown and Mercer walked through the front door of
Simons’s home, claiming seats on one side of a long,
formal dining room table. Magerman, Whitney, and
others joined a bit later, grabbing spots around the table,
with Simons pulling up a chair at the head.
It was the spring of 2004, and thirteen of
Renaissance’s top executives were meeting for dinner at
Simons’s twenty-two-acre estate in East Setauket, Long
Island. None of the group really wanted to be there that
evening, but they had to decide what to do about Alexey
Kononenko.
By then, Kononenko’s behavior had become a true
distraction. He regularly ignored assignments from
Brown and Mercer. When they scheduled a meeting to
discuss his uncooperative behavior, Kononenko didn’t
show up.
(Someone close to Kononenko disputes how he and
his actions have been portrayed by others who worked
with him.)
Simons and the others were in a difficult bind,
though. If they fired or reprimanded Kononenko and the
half dozen colleagues he directed, the group was liable to
bolt, just like Belopolsky and Volfbeyn. Their
nondisclosure agreements were difficult to enforce, and
while their noncompete contracts might prevent them
from trading in the US, Kononenko and the others could
return home to Eastern Europe, far from the reach of US
law.

Wielding polished silverware, the executives dug into
juicy steaks while sipping delicious red wine. The small
talk died down as Simons turned serious.
“We have a decision to make,” he said, which his
tablemates understood to refer to Kononenko’s
“noncollaborative” conduct.
Brown was energized and adamant, arguing that they
needed to retain Kononenko and his group. They
represented about a third of the researchers who
analyzed stocks and were too important to lose. Besides,
they had spent so much time training the group that it
would be a shame to see them leave.
“He adds value,” Brown said with confidence. “The
group is productive.”
Brown’s view reflected the sentiments of some at
Renaissance who felt that while Kononenko ruffled
feathers and could be unusually blunt, his behavior likely
reflected the culture he had become accustomed to in
Russia.
Mercer said hardly anything, of course, but he
seemed to agree with Brown and others at the table
voting to ignore Kononenko’s infractions. Simons also
seemed in favor of keeping the team.
“We can fire these guys,” Simons said. “But if they
leave, they’ll compete with us and make our lives
harder.”
Simons didn’t approve of Kononenko’s behavior, but
he thought Kononenko could be groomed into a team
player, and even emerge as an effective manager.
“He was a pain in the ass, and it was a difficult
decision,” Simons later told a friend. “But he didn’t steal
from us,” alluding to the alleged actions of Belopolsky
and Volfbeyn.
As Magerman listened to the arguments, he tensed
up. He couldn’t believe what he was hearing.

Kononenko’s team had tried to get Brown and Mercer
fired. They had forced Simons to take a pay cut and gave
everyone a hard time, upending the collaborative,
collegial culture that helped Renaissance thrive. Simons
saw potential in Kononenko? Magerman wasn’t standing
for it.
“This is disgusting!” he said, looking at Simons and
then at Brown. “If we don’t shut them down or fire them,
I’m quitting.”
Magerman looked over at Whitney, hoping for some
support. He didn’t hear anything. Whitney knew they
were outnumbered. Privately, Whitney had told Simons
he was leaving the firm if Alexey wasn’t fired. Simons
and the others were sure Magerman and Whitney were
bluffing; they weren’t going anywhere. A consensus was
reached: Kononenko and his gang would stay. Soon, he’d
even get a promotion.
“Give us time, David, we’ll manage it,” Brown said.
“We have a plan,” Simons added, also trying to
reassure Magerman.
Magerman and Whitney filed out of the room,
solemn and distressed. Soon, they’d form their own
plans.

=
Close to midnight, after his staffers left, Simons returned
to the quiet of his home. His firm was torn in two. Senior
staffers were about to spill Medallion’s most treasured
secrets. Nicholas’s death still haunted him. Simons had
to find a way to deal with it all.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
All models are wrong, but some are useful.
George Box, statistician

J

im Simons faced a growing list of problems.

He had one possible solution.

Staffers were squabbling, and two key scientists had
bolted, possibly taking Medallion’s secrets with them.
Simons had concerns about his remaining employees, as
well. Yes, the hedge fund, which managed over $5
billion, continued to score strong annual gains of about
25 percent after fees. In 2004, Medallion’s Sharpe ratio
even hit 7.5, a jaw-dropping figure that dwarfed that of
its rivals. But Simons worried about his employees
slacking. Renaissance had hired dozens of
mathematicians and scientists over the course of several
years, and Simons felt pressure to keep them busy and
productive. He needed to find them a new challenge.
“All these scientists are wealthier than they ever
imagined,” Simons told a colleague. “How do I motivate
them?”
Simons had another, more personal reason to seek a
new project. He continued to struggle with intense,
enduring emotional pain from the sudden death of his
son, Nicholas. A few years earlier, Simons had seemed
eager to retire from the trading business; now he was
desperate for distractions.
Simons had no interest in shaking up Medallion’s
operations. Once a year, the fund returned its gains to its
investors—mostly the firm’s own employees—ensuring
that it didn’t get too big. If Medallion managed much

more money, Simons, Henry Laufer, and others were
convinced that its performance—still tied to various
short-term price fluctuations—would suffer.
The size limit meant Medallion sometimes identified
more market aberrations and phenomena than it could
put to use. The discarded trading signals usually involved
longer-term opportunities. Simons’s scientists were
more confident about short-term signals, partly because
more data was available to help confirm them. A one-day
trading signal can incorporate data points for every
trading day of the year, for instance, while a one-year
signal depends on just one annual data point.
Nonetheless, the researchers were pretty sure they could
make solid money if they ever had a chance to develop
algorithms focused on a longer holding period.
That gave Simons an idea—why not start a new
hedge fund to take advantage of these extraneous,
longer-term predictive signals? The returns likely
wouldn’t be as good as Medallion’s, Simons realized,
given that a new fund wouldn’t be able to take advantage
of the firm’s more-dependable short-term trades, but
such a fund likely could manage a lot more money than
Medallion. A mega-fund holding investments for long
periods wouldn’t incur the trading costs that a similarly
sized fast-trading fund would, for example. Relying on
longer-term trades would also prevent the new fund
from cannibalizing Medallion’s returns.
Researching and then rolling out a new hedge fund
would represent a fresh challenge to galvanize the firm,
Simons concluded. There was an added bonus to the
idea, too. Simons was thinking about finding a buyer for
Renaissance. Maybe not for the entire firm, but for a
piece of it. Simons was approaching seventy years of age
and he thought it wouldn’t be a bad idea to sell some of
his equity in the firm, though he wasn’t willing to tell
anyone. A giant new hedge fund generating dependable,

recurring income from its fees and returns would carry
special appeal for potential buyers.
Some at Renaissance didn’t see the point of such a
venture. It likely would disrupt their work and lead to an
influx of nosy investors traipsing through the hallways.
But Simons had the last word, and he wanted the fund.
His researchers settled on one that would trade with
little human intervention, like Medallion, yet would hold
investments a month or even longer. It would
incorporate some of Renaissance’s usual tactics, such as
finding correlations and patterns in prices, but would
add other, more fundamental strategies, including
buying inexpensive shares based on price-earnings
ratios, balance-sheet data, and other information.
After thorough testing, the scientists determined the
new hedge fund could beat the stock market by a few
percentage points each year, while generating lower
volatility than the overall market. It would produce the
kinds of steady returns that hold special appeal for
pension funds and other large institutions. Even better,
the prospective fund could score those returns even if it
managed as much as $100 billion, they calculated, an
amount that would make it history’s largest hedge fund.
As a newly hired sales team began pitching the fund,
named the Renaissance Institutional Equities Fund, or
RIEF, they made it clear the fund wouldn’t resemble
Medallion. Some investors ignored the disclaimer,
considering it a mere formality. Same firm, same
researchers, same risk and trading models, same returns,
they figured. By 2005, Medallion sported annualized
returns of 38.4 percent over the previous fifteen years
(after those enormous fees), a performance that RIEF’s
sales documents made sure to note. The new fund’s
returns would have to be somewhat close to Medallion’s
results, the investors figured. Plus, RIEF was only
charging a 1 percent management fee and 10 percent of

all performance of any gains, a bargain compared to
Medallion.
RIEF opened its doors in the summer of 2005. A year
later, with the new fund already a few percentage points
ahead of the broader stock market, investors started
lining up to hand their money over. Soon, they had
plowed $14 billion into RIEF.
Some prospective investors seemed most excited by
the prospect of meeting Simons, the celebrity investor, or
his secretive staffers, who seemed blessed with magical
trading abilities. When David Dwyer, a senior sales
executive, led tours of Renaissance’s campus for
potential clients, he’d stop and point out scientists and
mathematicians as they went about their daily routines,
as if they were exotic, rarely seen creatures in their
natural habitat.
“In that conference room, our scientists review their
latest predictive signals.”
Ooh.
“That’s where the crucial peer-review process
happens.”
Aah.
“Over there, Jim Simons meets with his top
executives to map strategy.”
Wow!
As the visitors passed the kitchen area,
mathematicians sometimes wandered by to toast a bagel
or grab a muffin, eliciting excited nudging from the
group, and some alarm from staffers unaccustomed to
seeing outsiders staring at them.
Next, Dwyer took his visitors downstairs to see
Renaissance’s data group, where over thirty PhDs and
others—including Chinese nationals and a few newly
hired female scientists—were usually deep in thought

near whiteboards filled with intricate formulas. The job
of these scientists, Dwyer explained, was to take
thousands of outside data feeds pumping nonstop into
the company and scrub them clean, removing errors and
irregularities so the mathematicians upstairs could use
the information to uncover price patterns.
Dwyer’s tour usually concluded back upstairs in
Renaissance’s computer room, which was the size of a
couple of tennis courts. There, stacks of servers, in long
rows of eight-foot-tall metal cages, were linked together,
blinking and quietly processing thousands of trades,
even as his guests watched. The air in the room had a
different feel and smell—brittle and dry, as if they could
feel volts of electricity pumping. The room helped
underscore Dwyer’s message: Renaissance’s
mathematical models and scientific approach were its
backbone.
“Rarely did they come and not invest,” Dwyer says.
Sometimes Simons or Brown joined client
presentations to say hello and field questions. These
meetings sometimes veered in unexpected directions.
Once, a RIEF salesman arranged a lunch at
Renaissance’s Long Island office for the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, the largest foundation dedicated to
funding public-health initiatives. As the foundation’s
investment team entered a big conference room and
shook hands with RIEF sales staffers, they distributed
business cards embossed with the Wood Johnson motto:
“Building a Culture of Health.”
The lunch went well, and the foundation appeared
close to writing a big check to RIEF. To cap things off, a
thick, iced vanilla cake was placed in the middle of the
table. Everyone eyed the dessert, preparing for a taste.
Just then, Simons walked in, setting the room ablaze.
“Jim, can we take a picture?” asked one of the health
organization’s investment professionals.

As the small talk got under way, Simons began
making odd motions with his right hand. The foundation
executives had no clue what was happening, but nervous
RIEF staffers did. When Simons was desperate for a
smoke, he scrabbled at his left breast pocket, where he
kept his Merits. There was nothing in there, though, so
Simons called his assistant on an intercom system,
asking her to bring him a cigarette.
“Do you mind if I smoke?” Simons asked his guests.
Before they knew it, Simons was lighting up. Soon,
fumes were choking the room. The Robert Wood
Johnson representatives—still dedicated to building a
culture of health—were stunned. Simons didn’t seem to
notice or care. After some awkward chitchat, he looked
to put out his cigarette, now down to a burning butt, but
he couldn’t locate an ashtray. Now the RIEF staffers were
sweating—Simons was known to ash pretty much
anywhere he pleased in the office, even on the desks of
underlings and in their coffee mugs. Simons was in
Renaissance’s swankiest conference room, though, and
he couldn’t find an appropriate receptacle.
Finally, Simons spotted the frosted cake. He stood
up, reached across the table, and buried his cigarette
deep in the icing. As the cake sizzled, Simons walked out,
the mouths of his guests agape. The Renaissance
salesmen were crestfallen, convinced their lucrative sale
had been squandered. The foundation’s executives
recovered their poise quickly, however, eagerly signing a
big check. It was going to take more than choking on
cigarette smoke and a ruined vanilla cake to keep them
from the new fund.
Other than making the occasional slipup, Simons
was an effective salesman, a world-class mathematician
with a rare ability to connect with those who couldn’t do
stochastic differential equations. Simons told
entertaining stories, had a dry sense of humor, and held
interests far afield from science and moneymaking. He

also demonstrated unusual loyalty and concern for
others, qualities the investors may have sensed. Once,
Dennis Sullivan, returning to Stony Brook after two
decades in France, drove to Renaissance’s parking lot to
talk with Simons. The two spent hours speaking about
math formulas, but Simons sensed Sullivan was
struggling with a different kind of problem. It turned out
that Sullivan, who had six children from multiple
marriages over forty years, was fielding financial
requests from his kids and was having difficulty deciding
how to treat each fairly.
Simons sat silently, considering the dilemma before
offering a Solomonic answer in just two words.
“Eventually, equal,” Simons said.
The answer satisfied Sullivan, who departed feeling
relieved. The meeting cemented their friendship, and the
two began spending more time collaborating on
mathematics research papers.
Simons could be frank about his own personal life,
which also endeared him to investors and friends. When
asked how someone so devoted to science could smoke
so much, in defiance of statistical possibilities, Simons
answered that his genes had been tested, and he had the
unique ability to handle a habit that proved harmful to
most others.
“When you get past a certain age, you should be in
the clear,” he said.
Brown was almost as smooth and capable with
investors, but Mercer was another story. RIEF’s
marketers tried to keep him away from clients, lest he
laugh at an unexpected point in a conversation or do
something else off-putting. One time, when neither
Simons nor Brown was around to greet representatives
of a West Coast endowment, Mercer joined the meeting.
Asked how the firm made so much money, Mercer
offered an explanation.

“So, we have a signal,” Mercer began, his colleagues
nodding nervously. “Sometimes it tells us to buy
Chrysler, sometimes it tells us to sell.”
Instant silence and raised eyebrows. Chrysler hadn’t
existed as a company since being acquired by German
automaker Daimler back in 1998. Mercer didn’t seem to
know; he was a quant, so he didn’t actually pay attention
to the companies he traded. The endowment overlooked
the flub, becoming RIEF’s latest investor.
By the spring of 2007, it was getting hard to keep
investors away. Thirty-five billion dollars had been
plowed into RIEF, making it one of the world’s largest
hedge funds. Renaissance had to institute a $2 billion
per month limit on new investments—yes, the fund was
built to handle $100 billion, but not all at once. Simons
made plans for other new funds, initiating work on the
Renaissance Institutional Futures Fund, RIFF, to trade
futures contracts on bonds, currencies, and other assets
in a long-term style. A new batch of scientists was hired,
while staffers from other parts of the company lent a
hand, fulfilling Simons’s goal of energizing and unifying
staffers.1
He still had another pressing problem to address.

=
In late spring 2007, Simons was in his office in a
midtown New York City building—a forty-one-story
glass-and-steel structure steps from Grand Central
Terminal—staring at Israel Englander, a graying, fiftyseven-year-old billionaire known for his distinctive
tortoiseshell glasses. The men were tense, miserable, and
angry at each other. It wasn’t their first confrontation.
Four years earlier, researchers Pavel Volfbeyn and
Alexander Belopolsky had quit Renaissance to trade
stocks for Englander’s hedge fund, Millennium

Management. Furious, Simons stormed into Englander’s
office one day, demanding that he fire the traders, a
request that had offended Englander.
“Show me the proof,” he told Simons at the time,
asking for evidence that Volfbeyn and Belopolsky had
taken Renaissance’s proprietary information.
Privately, Englander wondered if Simons’s true fear
was the possibility of additional departures from his
firm, rather than any theft. Simons wouldn’t share much
with his rival. He and Renaissance sued Englander’s
firm, as well as Volfbeyn and Belopolsky, while the
traders brought countersuits against Renaissance.
Amid the hostilities, Volfbeyn and Belopolsky set up
their own quantitative-trading system, racking up about
$100 million of profits while becoming, as Englander
told a colleague, some of the most successful traders
Englander had encountered. At Renaissance, Volfbeyn
and Belopolsky had signed nondisclosure agreements
prohibiting them from using or sharing Medallion’s
secrets. They had refused to sign noncompete
agreements, though, viewing the firm as underhanded
for slipping them in a pile of other papers to be signed,
according to a colleague. With no signed noncompete
agreement to worry about, Englander figured he had the
right to hire the researchers as long as they didn’t use
any of Renaissance’s secrets.
Sitting in a plush chair across from Simons that
spring day, Englander said he hadn’t been privy to the
details of how his hires traded. Volfbeyn and Belopolsky
had told Englander and others that they relied on opensource software and the insights of academic papers and
other financial literature, not Renaissance’s intellectual
property. Why should Englander fire them?
Simons turned furious. He was also worried. If
Volfbeyn and Belopolsky weren’t stopped, their trading
could eat into Medallion’s profits. The defections might

pave the way for others to bolt. There also was a
principle involved, Simons felt.
They stole from me!
Evidence had begun to mount that Volfbeyn and
Belopolsky may, in fact, have taken Medallion’s
intellectual property. One independent expert concluded
that the researchers used much of the same source code
as Medallion. They also relied on a similar mathematical
model to measure the market impact of their trades. At
least one expert witness became so skeptical of Volfbeyn
and Belopolsky’s explanations that he refused to testify
on their behalf. One of the strategies Volfbeyn and
Belopolsky employed was even called “Henry’s signal.” It
seemed more than a coincidence that Renaissance used a
similar strategy with the exact same name developed by
Henry Laufer, Simons’s longtime partner.
Simons and Englander didn’t make much headway
that day, but a few months later, they cut a deal.
Englander’s firm agreed to terminate Volfbeyn and
Belopolsky and pay Renaissance $20 million. Some
within Renaissance were incensed—the renegade
researchers had made much more than $20 million
trading for Englander, and, after taking a break of
several years, they’d be free to resume their activities.
But Simons was relieved to put the dispute behind him
and to send a message of warning to those at the firm
who might think of following in the footsteps of the
wayward researchers.
It seemed nothing could stop Simons and
Renaissance.

=
RIEF was off to a great start and Medallion was still
printing money. Peter Brown was so cocksure that he
placed a bet with a colleague: If Medallion scored a 100
percent return in 2007, Brown would get his colleague’s

new, Mercedes E-Class car. Brown’s competitive streak
extended to other parts of his life. Lean and six feet tall,
Brown challenged colleagues to squash matches and
tests of strength in the company’s gym. When Simons
brought employees and their families to a resort in
Bermuda for a vacation, many lounged around a
swimming pool wearing knee-high black socks and
sandals, watching a water volleyball game. Suddenly, a
commotion disrupted the peace. Someone in the pool
was lunging for the ball, spraying water in his
teammates’ eyes, his elbows dangerously close to the face
of a nearby child.
“Who’s the maniac?” an alarmed mother asked,
edging closer to the pool.
“Oh, that’s just Peter,” a staffer said.
Both Brown and Mercer dealt in logic, not feelings.
Many of the scientists and mathematicians they hired
were just as brilliant, driven, and seemingly detached
from human emotion. On the way home from the
Bermuda trip, as staffers lined up to board the return
flight, someone suggested they clear the way for a
pregnant woman. Some Renaissance scientists refused.
They didn’t have anything against the woman, but if she
truly wanted to board early, she logically would have
arrived early, they said.
“It was like being with a bunch of Sheldons,” says an
outsider on the trip, referring to the character on the
television show The Big Bang Theory.
As he assumed more responsibility, Brown spent
more time dealing with marketing executives and others
who hadn’t experienced his brusque, erratic style. Like
an adolescent, Brown often was irreverent, even
mischievous, especially when the fund was doing well.
But he became unhinged about relatively small things.
Once, during a meeting, an underling inadvertently
placed his phone on vibrate mode, rather than turn it off.

As Brown spoke, the phone went off, shaking and
toppling a stack of books. Brown’s eyes widened. He
stared at the phone, and then at the employee. Then he
went berserk.
“Get that fucking thing out of here!” Brown screamed
at the top of his lungs.
“Take it easy, Peter,” said Mark Silber, the chief
financial officer. “Everything will be all right.”
Mercer also had an ability to calm Brown. Just being
around Mercer seemed to put Brown in better spirits.
Mercer didn’t interact very much with most colleagues,
whistling at times during the day, but he frequently
huddled with Brown to produce ideas to improve the
trading models. One was emotional and outgoing, the
other taciturn and circumspect, a bit like the comedy duo
Penn & Teller (but much less funny).

=
In July 2007, RIEF experienced a minor loss, but the
Medallion fund was up 50 percent for the year, and
Brown appeared positioned to win his colleague’s
Mercedes. Elsewhere in the economy, troubles were
brewing for so-called subprime home mortgages, the
kinds written by aggressive lenders to US borrowers with
scuffed or limited credit histories. Worrywarts predicted
the difficulties might spread, but few thought a corner of
the mortgage market was capable of crippling the
broader stock or bond markets. Either way, Brown and
Mercer’s statistical-arbitrage stock trades were market
neutral, so the jitters were unlikely to affect returns.
On Friday, August 3, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average plummeted 281 points, a loss attributed to
concern about the health of investment bank Bear
Stearns. The drop didn’t seem like a big deal, though.
Most senior investors were on vacation, after all, so
reading into the losses didn’t seem worthwhile.

By that summer, a group of quantitative hedge funds
had emerged dominant. Inspired by Simons’s success,
most had their own market-neutral strategies just as
reliant on computer models and automated trades. In
Morgan Stanley’s midtown Manhattan headquarters,
Peter Muller—a blue-eyed quant who played piano at a
local club in his free time—led a team managing $6
billion for a division of the bank called PDT. In
Greenwich, Connecticut, Clifford Asness, a University of
Chicago PhD, helped lead a $39 billion quantitative
hedge-fund firm called AQR Capital Management. And
in Chicago, Ken Griffin—who, in the late 1980s, had
installed a satellite dish on his dormitory roof at Harvard
to get up-to-the-second quotes—was using high-powered
computers to make statistical-arbitrage trades and other
moves at his $13 billion firm, Citadel.
On the afternoon of Monday, August 6, all the quant
traders were hit with sudden, serious losses. At AQR,
Asness snapped shut the blinds of the glass partition of
his corner office and began calling contacts to
understand what was happening. Word emerged that a
smaller quant fund called Tykhe Capital was in trouble,
while a division of Goldman Sachs that invested in a
systematic fashion also was suffering. It wasn’t clear who
was doing the selling, or why it was impacting so many
firms that presumed their strategies unique. Later,
academics and others would posit that a fire sale by at
least one quant fund, along with abrupt moves by others
to slash their borrowing—perhaps as their own investors
raised cash to deal with struggling mortgage investments
—had sparked a brutal downturn that became known as
“the quant quake.”
During the stock market crash of 1987, investors
were failed by sophisticated models. In 1998, Long-Term
Capital saw historic losses. Algorithmic traders braced
for their latest fiasco.

“It’s bad, Cliff,” Michael Mendelson, AQR’s head of
global trading, told Asness. “This has the feel of a
liquidation.”2
For most of that Monday, Simons wasn’t focused on
stocks. He and his family were in Boston following the
death and funeral of his mother, Marcia. In the
afternoon, Simons and his cousin, Robert Lourie, who
ran Renaissance’s futures-trading business, flew back to
Long Island on Simons’s Gulfstream G450. Onboard,
they learned Medallion and RIEF were getting crushed.
Simons told Lourie not to worry.
“We always have very good days” after difficult ones,
he said.
Tuesday was worse, however. Simons and his
colleagues watched their computer screens flash red for
no apparent reason. Brown’s mood turned grim.
“I don’t know what the hell is going on, but it’s not
good,” Brown told someone.
On Wednesday, things got scary. Simons, Brown,
Mercer, and about six others hustled into a central
conference room, grabbing seats around a table. They
immediately focused on a series of charts affixed to a
wall detailing the magnitude of the firm’s losses and at
what point Medallion’s bank lenders would make margin
calls, demanding additional collateral to avoid selling the
fund’s equity positions. One basket of stocks had already
plunged so far that Renaissance had to come up with
additional collateral to forestall a sale. If its positions
suffered much deeper losses, Medallion would have to
provide its lenders with even more collateral to prevent
massive stock sales and losses that were even more
dramatic.
The conference room was close by an open atrium
where groups of researchers met to work. As the meeting
continued, nervous staffers studied the faces of those

entering and leaving the room, gauging the level of
desperation among the executives.
Inside, a battle had begun. Seven years earlier,
during the 2000 technology-stock meltdown, Brown
didn’t know what to do. This time, he was sure. The selloff wouldn’t last long, he argued. Renaissance should
stick with its trading system, Brown said. Maybe even
add positions. Their system, programmed to buy and sell
on its own, was already doing just that, seizing on the
chaos and expanding some positions.
“This is an opportunity!” Brown said.
Bob Mercer seemed in agreement.
“Trust the models—let them run,” Henry Laufer
added.
Simons shook his head. He didn’t know if his firm
could survive much more pain. He was scared. If losses
grew, and they couldn’t come up with enough collateral,
the banks would sell Medallion’s positions and suffer
their own huge losses. If that happened, no one would
deal with Simons’s fund again. It would be a likely death
blow, even if Renaissance suffered smaller financial
losses than its bank lenders.
Medallion needed to sell, not buy, he told his
colleagues.
“Our job is to survive,” Simons said. “If we’re wrong,
we can always add [positions] later.”
Brown seemed shocked by what he was hearing. He
had absolute faith in the algorithms he and his fellow
scientists had developed. Simons was overruling him in a
public way and taking issue with the trading system
itself, it seemed.
On Thursday, Medallion began reducing equity
positions to build cash. Back in the conference room,
Simons, Brown, and Mercer stared at a single computer
screen that was updating the firm’s profits and losses.

They wanted to see how their selling would influence the
market. When the first batch of shares were sold, the
market felt the blow, dropping further, causing still more
losses. Later, it happened again. In silence, Simons stood
and stared.
Problems grew for all the leading quant firms; PDT
lost $600 million of Morgan Stanley’s money over just
two days. Now the selling was spreading to the overall
market. That Thursday, the S&P 500 dropped 3 percent,
and the Dow fell 387 points. Medallion already had lost
more than $1 billion that week, a stunning 20 percent.
RIEF, too, was plunging, down nearly $3 billion, or
about 10 percent. An eerie quiet enveloped Renaissance’s
lunchroom, as researchers and others sat in silence,
wondering if the firm would survive. Researchers stayed
up past midnight, trying to make sense of the problems.
Are our models broken?
It turned out that the firm’s rivals shared about a
quarter of its positions. Renaissance was plagued with
the same illness infecting so many others. Some rankand-file senior scientists were upset—not so much by the
losses, but because Simons had interfered with the
trading system and reduced positions. Some took the
decision as a personal affront, a sign of ideological
weakness and a lack of conviction in their labor.
“You’re dead wrong,” a senior researcher emailed
Simons.
“You believe in the system, or you don’t,” another
scientist said, with some disgust.
Simons said he did believe in the trading system, but
the market’s losses were unusual—more than twenty
standard deviations from the average, a level of loss most
had never come close to experiencing.
“How far can it go?” Simons wondered.

Renaissance’s lenders were even more fearful. If
Medallion kept losing money, Deutsche Bank and
Barclays likely would be facing billions of dollars of
losses. Few at the banks were even aware of the basketoption arrangements. Such sudden, deep losses likely
would shock investors and regulators, raising questions
about the banks’ management and overall health. Martin
Malloy, the Barclays executive who dealt most closely
with Renaissance, picked up the phone to call Brown,
hoping for some reassurance. Brown sounded harried
but in control.
Others were beginning to panic. That Friday, Dwyer,
the senior executive hired two years earlier to sell RIEF
to institutions, left the office to pitch representatives of a
reinsurance company. With RIEF down about 10 percent
for the year, even as the overall stock market was up,
customers were up in arms. More important for Dwyer:
He had sold his home upon joining Renaissance and
invested the proceeds in Medallion. Like others at the
firm, he had also borrowed money from Deutsche Bank
to invest in the fund. Now Dwyer was down nearly a
million dollars. Dwyer had battled Crohn’s disease in his
youth. The symptoms had abated, but now he was
dealing with sharp aches, fever, and terrible abdominal
cramping; his stress had triggered a return of the
disease.
After the meeting, Dwyer drove to Long Island
Sound to board a ferry to Massachusetts to meet his
family for the weekend. As Dwyer parked his car and
waited to hand his keys to an attendant, he imagined an
end to his agony.
Just let the brakes fail.
Dwyer was in an emotional free fall. Back in the
office, though, signs were emerging that Medallion was
stabilizing. When the fund again sold positions that
morning, the market seemed to handle the trades

without weakening. Some attributed the market’s turn to
a buy order that day by Asness of AQR.
“I think we’ll get through this,” Simons told a
colleague. “Let’s stop lightening up.” Simons was
ordering the firm to halt its selling.
By Monday morning, Medallion and RIEF were both
making money again, as were most other big quant
traders, as if a fever had broken. Dwyer felt deep relief.
Later, some at Renaissance complained the gains would
have been larger had Simons not overridden their
trading system.
“We gave up a lot of extra profit,” a staffer told him.
“I’d make the same decision again,” Simons
responded.

=
Before long, Renaissance had regained its footing.
Growing turbulence in global markets aided Medallion’s
signals, helping the fund score gains of 86 percent in
2007, nearly enough for Brown to win the Mercedes. The
newer RIEF fund lost a bit of money that year, but the
loss didn’t seem a huge deal.
By early 2008, problems for subprime mortgages
had infected almost every corner of the US and global
stock and bond markets, but Medallion was thriving
from the chaos, as usual, rising over 20 percent in the
year’s first few months. Simons revived the idea of
selling as much as 20 percent of Renaissance.
In May 2008, Simons, Brown, and a few other
Renaissance executives flew to Qatar to meet
representatives of the country’s sovereign-wealth fund,
to discuss selling a piece of Renaissance. Because they
arrived on a Friday, a day of prayer for Muslims, their
meetings couldn’t be scheduled until the next day. The
hotel’s concierge recommended the group try dune

bashing, a popular form of off-roading in which fourwheel-drive vehicles climb and then slide down steep
sand dunes at high speeds and dangerous angles, much
like a desert roller coaster. It was a brutally hot day, and
Brown and others hit the hotel’s swimming pool. But
Simons headed out into the desert with Stephen Robert,
an industry veteran and former chief executive of the
investment firm Oppenheimer, whom Simons had hired
to oversee Renaissance’s marketing and strategic
direction.
Before long, they were riding dunes that seemed as
high as mountains at such breakneck speeds that their
vehicle almost tipped over. Simons turned pale.
“Jim, are you okay?” Robert shouted over the
vehicle’s engine.
“We could get killed!” Simons yelled back, fear in his
voice.
“Relax, they do this all the time,” Robert told him.
“What if this tips over?” Simons responded. “People
think I’m pretty smart—I’m going to die in the dumbest
way possible!”
For another five minutes, Simons was gripped with
terror. Then, suddenly, he relaxed, color returning to his
face.
“I got it!” Simons yelled to Robert. “There’s a
principle in physics: We can’t tip over unless the tires
have traction! We’re in sand, so the tires have nothing to
grab on to!”
Simons flashed a smile, proud he’d figured out a
most relevant scientific problem.

=
Glen Whitney wasn’t nearly as relaxed.

After the dinner at Jim Simons’s home where it was
decided that Alexey Kononenko wouldn’t be punished for
his behavior, Whitney became dejected. He and
Magerman had promised they would quit, but few at
Renaissance believed them. Who forgoes tens of millions
of dollars a year over an annoying colleague and worries
about a firm’s culture?
Whitney was serious, though. He saw the Kononenko
decision as the last straw. Earlier, Whitney had protested
Simons’s decision to kick non-employees out of
Medallion. He wasn’t sure a hedge fund added much to
society if it just made money for employees. Once,
Renaissance had seemed like a close-knit university
department. Now the sharp elbows were getting to him.
In the summer of 2008, Whitney announced he was
accepting a leadership role at the National Museum of
Mathematics, or MoMath, the first museum in North
America devoted to celebrating mathematics. Colleagues
mocked him. If Whitney really wanted to improve
society, some told him, he’d stay, accumulate more
wealth, and then give it away later in life.
“You’re leaving because you want to feel good about
yourself,” one colleague said.
“I have a right to personal happiness,” Whitney
responded.
“That’s selfish,” a staffer sniffed.
Whitney quit.
David Magerman also had had enough. A few years
earlier, he had experienced a midlife crisis, partly due to
the shocking September 11 terrorist attacks. Searching
for more meaning in his life, Magerman traveled to
Israel, returning more committed to Judaism. Not only
was Kononenko still at the firm, but now he was corunning the entire equities business. Magerman couldn’t
take it anymore.

Magerman moved with his wife and three children
from Long Island to Gladwyne, Pennsylvania, outside
Philadelphia, searching for a calmer and more spiritual
lifestyle.

=
As the global economy deteriorated throughout 2008,
and financial markets tumbled, interest in a stake in
Renaissance evaporated. But the Medallion fund thrived
in the chaos, soaring 82 percent that year, helping
Simons make over $2 billion in personal profits. The
enormous gains sparked a call from a House of
Representatives committee asking Simons to testify as
part of its investigation into the causes of the financial
collapse. Simons prepped diligently with his publicrelations advisor Jonathan Gasthalter. With fellow
hedge-fund managers George Soros to his right and John
Paulson on his left, Simons told Congress that he would
back a push to force hedge funds to share information
with regulators and that he supported higher taxes for
hedge-fund managers.
Simons was something of an afterthought, however,
both at the hearings and in the finance industry itself. All
eyes were on Paulson, Soros, and a few other investors
who, unlike Simons, had successfully anticipated the
financial meltdown. They did it with old-fashioned
investment research, a reminder of the enduring
potential and appeal of those traditional methods.
Paulson had first grown concerned about the
runaway housing market in 2005, when a colleague
named Paolo Pellegrini developed a price chart
indicating that the housing market was 40 percent
overpriced. Paulson knew opportunity was at hand.
“This is our bubble!” Paulson told Pellegrini. “This is
proof.”

Paulson and Pellegrini purchased protection for the
riskiest mortgages in the form of credit default swaps,
resulting in a $20 billion windfall over 2007 and 2008.
George Soros, the veteran hedge-fund investor, placed
his own CDS bets, scoring over a billion dollars in
profits.3 Baby-faced, thirty-nine-year-old David Einhorn
won his own acclaim at a May 2008 industry conference
when he accused investment bank Lehman Brothers of
using accounting tricks to avoid billions of dollars of
real-estate-related losses. Einhorn, who later attributed
his success to his “critical thinking skill,” was vindicated
later that year when Lehman declared bankruptcy.4
The lesson was obvious: One could outsmart the
market. It just took diligence, intelligence, and a whole
lot of gumption. Simons’s quantitative models, nerdy
mathematicians, and geeky scientists, while effective,
were too hard to understand, their methods too difficult
to pull off, most decided.
In 2008, after RIEF dropped about 17 percent,
Renaissance’s researchers waved the losses off; they were
within their simulations and seemed puny compared to
the S&P 500’s 37 percent drubbing, including dividends,
that year. The scientists became concerned in 2009,
however, when RIEF lost over 6 percent and the S&P
500 soared 26.5 percent. All those investors who had
convinced themselves that RIEF would generate
Medallion-like returns suddenly realized the firm was
serious when it said it was a very different fund. Others
grumbled that Medallion was still killing it while RIEF
was struggling, believing something unfair was going on.
No longer in awe of Simons, RIEF investors
peppered the seventy-one-year-old with tough questions
in a May 2009 conference call. Simons wrote to his
investors that the fund had suffered a “performance
onslaught” during an “extreme market rally.”

“We certainly understand our clients’ discomfort,” he
said.5
Investors began to flee RIEF, which soon was down
to less than $5 billion. A second fund Simons had started
to trade stock futures also took on water and lost
investors, while new clients dried up.
“No client on earth would touch us,” says Dwyer, the
senior salesman.
A year later, after some more underwhelming
performance from RIEF, Simons, who had turned
seventy-two, decided it was time to pass the torch at the
firm to Brown and Mercer. Medallion was still on fire.
The fund, now managing $10 billion, had posted average
returns of about 45 percent a year, after fees, since 1988,
returns that outpaced those of Warren Buffett and every
other investing star. (At that point, Buffett’s Berkshire
Hathaway had gained 20 percent annually since he took
over in 1965.)
But Brown told a reporter the firm wasn’t even sure
it would keep RIEF or RIFF going, the latest sign
investors had soured on the quantitative approach.
“If we assess that it’s not something that’s going to
sell, then we’ll decide it’s not good to be in that
business,” Brown said.
As for Simons, he had devoted more than two
decades to building remarkable wealth. Now he was
going to spend it.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

J too.

im Simons liked making money. He enjoyed spending it,

Stepping down from Renaissance gave Simons—who,
by then, was worth about $11 billion—more time on his
220-foot yacht, Archimedes. Named for the Greek
mathematician and inventor, the $100 million vessel
featured a formal dining room that sat twenty, a woodburning fireplace, a spacious Jacuzzi, and a grand piano.
Sometimes, Simons flew friends on his Gulfstream G450
to a foreign location, where they’d join Jim and Marilyn
on the super-yacht.
The ship’s presence drew the attention of local media,
making the aging and still-secretive mathematician
unlikely international tabloid fodder.
“He was very down to earth,” a taxi driver named
Kenny Macrae told the Scottish Sun when Simons and
some guests visited in Stornoway, Scotland, docking for a
day trip. “He gave me a reasonable tip, too.”1
Several years later, when Simons visited Bristol,
England—the BBC speculated that Simons might be in
town to purchase a British soccer team—the Archimedes
became one of the largest ships ever to visit the city. Back
home, Simons lived in a $50 million apartment in a
limestone, pre-war Fifth Avenue building with stunning
Central Park views. Some mornings, Simons bumped into
George Soros, a neighbor in the building.
Years earlier, Marilyn had carved out space in her
dressing room to launch a family foundation. Over time,
she and Jim gave over $300 million to Stony Brook
University, among other institutions. As Simons edged

away from Renaissance, he became more personally
involved in their philanthropy. More than anything,
Simons relished tackling big problems. Soon, he was
working with Marilyn to target two areas in dire need of
solutions: autism research and mathematics education.
In 2003, Simons, who was dealing with a family
member who had been diagnosed with autism, convened a
roundtable of top scientists to discuss the developmental
disease. He committed $100 million to fund new research,
becoming the largest private donor in the field. Three
years later, Simons tapped Columbia University
neurobiologist Gerald Fischbach to expand his efforts.
Over several years, the team established a repository of
genetic samples from thousands of individuals with
autism, as well as their family members, which they called
the Simons Simplex Collection. The project would help
scientists identify over one hundred genes related to
autism and improve the understanding of the disease’s
biology. Research driven by the foundation would
discover mutations believed to play a role in the disorder.
Separately, as technology and finance companies
scooped up those with strong mathematics backgrounds,
Simons became disturbed by how many math teachers in
US public schools had limited education in the area
themselves. Earlier in the decade, Simons had traveled to
Washington, DC, to pitch the idea of providing stipends
for the best mathematics teachers to reduce their
temptation to join private industry. In a matter of
minutes, Simons persuaded Chuck Schumer, the
influential Democratic senator from New York, to support
the proposal.
“That’s a great idea!” Schumer boomed. “We’ll get
right on it.”
Elated, Simons and a colleague plopped down on a
couch outside Schumer’s office. As a different group got
off the couch to enter Schumer’s office, Simons listened to
their pitch and the senator’s response.

“That’s a great idea! We’ll get right on it,” Schumer
said, once again.
Simons realized he couldn’t count on politicians. In
2004, he helped launch Math for America, a nonprofit
dedicated to promoting math education and supporting
outstanding teachers. Eventually, the foundation would
spend millions of dollars annually to provide annual
stipends of $15,000 to one thousand top math and science
teachers in New York’s public middle schools and high
schools, or about 10 percent of the city’s teachers in the
subjects. It also hosted seminars and workshops, creating
a community of enthusiastic teachers.
“Instead of beating up the bad teachers, we focus on
celebrating the good ones,” Simons says. “We give them
status and money, and they stay in the field.”
Simons remained Renaissance’s chairman and main
shareholder, staying in regular contact with Brown,
Mercer, and others. In reflective moments, Simons
sometimes acknowledged having difficulty transitioning
from the firm.
“I feel irrelevant,” he told Marilyn one day.2
With time, Simons would find his philanthropic
ventures as challenging as those he had encountered in
mathematics and financial markets, lifting his spirits.

=
David Magerman moved with his wife and three young
children to a Philadelphia suburb, searching for new
meaning in his own life and perhaps a bit of peace after all
those clashes at Renaissance. Magerman was eager to
make a positive impact on society. Unlike Simons, who
never had qualms about Renaissance’s work, Magerman
felt misgivings, even a bit of guilt. Magerman had devoted
years of his life to helping Renaissance’s wealthy
employees become even richer. Now he wanted to help
others.

Magerman didn’t have Simons’s billions, but he left
Renaissance with well over $50 million, thanks to years of
hefty bonuses and an enormous return on his investment
in the Medallion fund. Magerman, who was beginning to
adopt a Modern Orthodox lifestyle, began giving millions
of dollars to needy students and Jewish day schools in the
area, which had been hit hard by the 2008 economic
downturn. Eventually, Magerman started his own
foundation and a high school.
His new life didn’t bring much serenity, however.
Magerman brought his strong opinions to the world of
philanthropy, insisting on so many requirements and
conditions that some local leaders turned his money
down, leading to hurt feelings. At one point, he was caught
in a screaming match with a group of middle-school
parents. Magerman joined the faculty of his alma mater,
the University of Pennsylvania, lecturing in the Electrical
and Systems Engineering department and giving a course
on quantitative portfolio management. Disagreements
arose there, too.
“The kids didn’t like me; I didn’t like them,” he says.
Magerman helped finance a Will Ferrell movie called
Everything Must Go, which received decent reviews but
disappointed Magerman, who never saw a final cut. He
agreed to watch another film he financed, Café, starring
Jennifer Love Hewitt, hosting the actor and her boyfriend
in his home theater, but Magerman wasn’t a fan of that
film, either.3
For all his faults, Magerman was the rare quant
blessed with a degree of self-awareness. He began working
with a therapist to eliminate, or at least tone down, his
confrontational behavior, and he seemed to make
progress.
By 2010, two years after leaving Renaissance,
Magerman was itching to return. He missed computer
programming and was a bit bored, but he also didn’t want
to uproot his family again. Magerman got in touch with

Peter Brown and worked out an arrangement to work
remotely from home, a perfect solution for someone who
couldn’t seem to avoid personal squabbles.
When he quit, Magerman had overseen the software
responsible for executing all of Renaissance’s
computerized stock trades. Now Kononenko was running
the effort, and it was racking up big gains. A return to that
group was untenable. Instead, Magerman began doing
research for Renaissance’s bond, commodity, and
currency-trading business. Soon, he was again
participating in key meetings, his booming and insistent
voice piped into speakers from the ceilings of
Renaissance’s conference rooms, an effect colleagues
joked was like listening to “the voice of God.”
“You can’t win for trying, sometimes,” Magerman
says.
He returned to a firm on more solid ground than he
had expected. Renaissance wasn’t quite as collegial as it
had been in the past, but the team still worked well
together, perhaps even with a greater sense of urgency. By
then, RIEF’s returns had improved enough for Brown and
Mercer to decide to keep it open for business, along with
the newer fund, RIFF. The two funds managed a
combined $6 billion, down from over $30 billion three
years earlier, but at least investors had stopped fleeing.
Medallion, still only available to employees, remained
the heart of the firm. It now managed about $10 billion
and was scoring annual gains of approximately 65
percent, before the investor fees, resulting in near-record
profits. Medallion’s long-term record was arguably the
greatest in the history of the financial markets, a reason
investors and others were becoming fascinated with the
secretive firm.
“There’s Renaissance Technologies, and then there’s
everyone else,” The Economist said in 2010.4

Medallion still held thousands of long and short
positions at any time, and its holding period ranged from
one or two days to one or two weeks. The fund did even
faster trades, described by some as high-frequency, but
many of those were for hedging purposes or to gradually
build its positions. Renaissance still placed an emphasis
on cleaning and collecting its data, but it had refined its
risk management and other trading techniques.
“I’m not sure we’re the best at all aspects of trading,
but we’re the best at estimating the cost of a trade,”
Simons told a colleague a couple years earlier.
In some ways, the Renaissance machine was more
powerful than before Magerman quit. The company now
employed about 250 staffers and over sixty PhDs,
including experts in artificial intelligence, quantum
physicists, computational linguists, statisticians, and
number theorists, as well as other scientists and
mathematicians.
Astronomers, who are accustomed to scrutinizing
large, confusing data sets and discovering evidence of
subtle phenomena, proved especially capable of
identifying overlooked market patterns. Elizabeth Barton,
for example, received her PhD from Harvard University
and used telescopes in Hawaii and elsewhere to study the
evolution of galaxies before joining Renaissance. As it
slowly became a bit more diverse, the firm also hired Julia
Kempe, a former student of Elwyn Berlekamp and an
expert in quantum computing.
Medallion still did bond, commodity, and currency
trades, and it made money from trending and reversionpredicting signals, including a particularly effective one
aptly named Déjà Vu. More than ever, though, it was
powered by complex equity trades featuring a mixture of
complex signals, rather than simple pairs trades, such as
buying Coke and selling Pepsi.
The gains on each trade were never huge, and the fund
only got it right a bit more than half the time, but that was

more than enough.
“We’re right 50.75 percent of the time . . . but we’re
100 percent right 50.75 percent of the time,” Mercer told a
friend. “You can make billions that way.”
Mercer likely wasn’t sharing his firm’s exact trading
edge—his larger point was that Renaissance enjoyed a
slight advantage in its collection of thousands of
simultaneous trades, one that was large and consistent
enough to make an enormous fortune.
Driving these reliable gains was a key insight: Stocks
and other investments are influenced by more factors and
forces than even the most sophisticated investors
appreciated. For example, to predict the direction of a
stock like Alphabet, the parent of Google, investors
generally try to forecast the company’s earnings, the
direction of interest rates, the health of the US economy,
and the like. Others will anticipate the future of search
and online advertising, the outlook for the broader
technology industry, the trajectory of global companies,
and metrics and ratios related to earnings, book value,
and other variables.
Renaissance staffers deduced that there is even more
that influences investments, including forces not readily
apparent or sometimes even logical. By analyzing and
estimating hundreds of financial metrics, social media
feeds, barometers of online traffic, and pretty much
anything that can be quantified and tested, they
uncovered new factors, some borderline impossible for
most to appreciate.
“The inefficiencies are so complex they are, in a sense,
hidden in the markets in code,” a staffer says. “RenTec
decrypts them. We find them across time, across risk
factors, across sectors and industries.”
Even more important: Renaissance concluded that
there are reliable mathematical relationships between all
these forces. Applying data science, the researchers

achieved a better sense of when various factors were
relevant, how they interrelated, and the frequency with
which they influenced shares. They also tested and teased
out subtle, nuanced mathematical relationships between
various shares—what staffers call multidimensional
anomalies—that other investors were oblivious to or
didn’t fully understand.
“These relationships have to exist, since companies
are interconnected in complex ways,” says a former
Renaissance executive. “This interconnectedness is hard
to model and predict with accuracy, and it changes over
time. RenTec has built a machine to model this
interconnectedness, track its behavior over time, and bet
on when prices seem out of whack according to these
models.”
Outsiders didn’t quite get it, but the real key was the
firm’s engineering—how it put all those factors and forces
together in an automated trading system. The firm bought
a certain number of stocks with positive signals, often a
combination of more granular individual signals, and
shorted, or bet against, stocks with negative signals,
moves determined by thousands of lines of source code.
“There is no individual bet we make that we can
explain by saying we think one stock is going to go up or
another down,” a senior staffer says. “Every bet is a
function of all the other bets, our risk profile, and what we
expect to do in the near and distant future. It’s a big,
complex optimization based on the premise that we
predict the future well enough to make money from our
predictions, and that we understand risk, cost, impact,
and market structure well enough to leverage the hell out
of it.”
How the firm wagered was at least as important as
what it wagered on. If Medallion discovered a profitable
signal, for example that the dollar rose 0.1 percent
between nine a.m. and ten a.m., it wouldn’t buy when the
clock struck nine, potentially signaling to others that a

move happened each day at that time. Instead, it spread
its buying out throughout the hour in unpredictable ways,
to preserve its trading signal. Medallion developed
methods of trading some of its strongest signals “to
capacity,” as insiders called it, moving prices such that
competitors couldn’t find them. It was a bit like hearing of
a huge markdown on a hot item at Target and buying up
almost all the discounted merchandise the moment the
store opens, so no one else even realizes the sale took
place.
“Once we’ve been trading a signal for a year, it looks
like something different to people who don’t know our
trades,” an insider says.
Simons summed up the approach in a 2014 speech in
South Korea: “It’s a very big exercise in machine learning,
if you want to look at it that way. Studying the past,
understanding what happens and how it might impinge,
nonrandomly, on the future.”5

=
For a long time, Bob Mercer was a peculiar but largely
benign figure within the company. Silver-haired with dark
eyebrows, he favored wire-rimmed glasses and high-end
shoes. Mercer whistled a lot and teased a few liberal
colleagues, but, mostly, he just spoke with Peter Brown.
“He comes up with all the ideas,” Brown told a
colleague, likely with excess modesty. “I express them.”
Mercer was truly self-contained. He once told a
colleague that he preferred the company of cats to
humans. At night, Mercer retreated to his Long Island
estate, Owl’s Nest—a nod to another creature known for
wisdom, calm, and long periods of silence—where he
toyed with a $2.7 million model train that ran on a track
half the size of a basketball court.6 (In 2009, Mercer sued
the manufacturer, claiming he had been overcharged by
$700,000. The manufacturer countered that the costs had

ballooned after it was asked to finish installing the track in
a rush before Mercer’s daughter’s wedding.)
“I’m happy going through my life without saying
anything to anybody,” Mercer told the Wall Street Journal
in 2010.7
Those who got to know Mercer understood he was a
political conservative, a National Rifle Association
member who amassed a collection of machine guns as
well as the gas-operated AR-18 assault rifle used by
Arnold Schwarzenegger in The Terminator.8 Few involved
with Renaissance spent much time focusing on these
views, however.
“Bob talked about the need to protect oneself from the
government, and the need to have guns and gold,” says an
early investor in the Medallion fund. “I didn’t think he was
for real.”
Every year or two, Mercer took a few days off to fly to
Ohio State to work on computer projects with colleagues
from graduate school. Mercer often treated the group to
lunch at a local steakhouse, where he hummed to himself
much of the meal, often with a serene smile on his face.
When Mercer spoke to the academics about matters
unrelated to their project, he often shared a disdain for
taxes and a skepticism of climate change, recalls Tim
Cooper, a physics professor. Once, Mercer rattled off an
array of statistics to demonstrate that nature emits more
carbon dioxide than humans. Later, when Cooper checked
the data, it was accurate, but Mercer had overlooked the
fact that nature absorbs as much carbon dioxide as it
emits, which mankind does not.
“It sounded like someone had got to him,” Cooper
says. “Even a smart guy can get the details right but the
big picture wrong.”
Until 2008, Mercer’s family foundation mostly gave
money to fringe causes. Mercer helped fund work by
Arthur Robinson, the biochemist in southern Oregon who

was collecting thousands of vials of human urine, which
Robinson believed held the key to extending human
longevity. Mercer subscribed to Robinson’s newsletter,
which argued that low levels of nuclear radiation weren’t
very harmful, and could even be beneficial, and that
climate science is a hoax. Mercer gave Robinson $1.4
million to buy freezers for his urine stockpile.9
After Barack Obama was elected president in 2008,
Mercer, now worth several hundred million dollars, began
to make sizable political donations. Two years later, when
Robinson ran for Congress, Mercer paid $300,000 for
attack ads aimed at his Democratic opponent,
Representative Peter DeFazio, who had wanted to close
tax loopholes and enact new taxes on certain financial
trades. Mercer never told Robinson he was sponsoring the
ads. (Robinson lost in a surprisingly close race.)
Mercer’s emergence as a high-profile right-wing donor
caused a bit of head-scratching within Republican circles.
Many serious contributors want something from
politicians, and it’s usually reasonably clear what they’re
after. Mercer never asked for much in return for his cash.
Political operatives concluded that Mercer was a rare
breed, an ideologue driven by long-held principles. He
had an intense suspicion of government and resentment
of the establishment, at least in part the result of that
frustrating summer writing code at the air force base in
New Mexico. Like many conservatives, Mercer also had an
equally intense loathing of Bill and Hillary Clinton.
By the time Mercer turned sixty-four in 2010, he was
convinced government should play a minimal role in
society, partly because governments empower
incompetence. Mercer had worked in private industry
most of his life and hadn’t demonstrated much interest in
public service, so it wasn’t like he had a lot of experience
to lean on as he formed this view. Still, policy errors
gnawed at him, colleagues said, as did the alleged
hypocrisy of elected officials. In conversations, Mercer
emphasized the importance of personal freedoms. Some

considered him an “extreme libertarian.” Ayn Rand might
have imagined a hero like Mercer—a tall, ruggedly
handsome individualist who was a huge fan of capitalism
and always rational and in control.
Now that he had enormous wealth, Mercer wanted to
do something to alter the nation’s direction. His timing
was perfect. In 2010, the Supreme Court handed down a
landmark decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election
Commission, ruling that election spending by wealthy
donors and others was a form of free speech protected
under the First Amendment. The decision paved the way
for super PACs, which could accept unlimited amounts of
money to support a candidate as long as they didn’t
officially coordinate with the campaign.
After the decision, Simons began donating heavily to
Democratic causes, while Mercer stepped up his support
for Republican politicians. Mercer’s penchant for privacy
limited his activity, however, as did his focus on
Renaissance. It was his second-oldest daughter, Rebekah,
who started showing up at conservative fund-raising
events and other get-togethers, becoming the family’s
public face, and the one driving its political strategy.
Rebekah cut a distinctive figure. “Bekah,” as friends
and family referred to her, was tall and auburn-haired.
She favored glittery, 1950s-style cat’s-eye glasses and bore
a resemblance to the actor Joan Cusack. A Stanford
University graduate in biology and mathematics, Rebekah
spent a few years working for Magerman at Renaissance
before leaving to homeschool her four children and help
run a gourmet cookie store with her sisters.
Rebekah first made headlines in the spring of 2010,
when she and her then-husband Sylvain Mirochnikoff
spent $28 million to buy six adjoining units in the fortyone-story Heritage at Trump Place on Manhattan’s Upper
West Side, creating a triplex with seventeen bedrooms
that was twice the size of Gracie Mansion, New York City’s
mayoral residence.10

For a while, Rebekah and her father backed traditional
right-wing groups and causes, such as the Freedom
Partners Action Fund, a conservative political action
committee founded by billionaire industrialists Charles
and David Koch and the Heritage Foundation. Sometimes,
Rebekah and Bob would walk through Republican fundraising events locked arm-in-arm. Rebekah, the more
sociable of the pair, did most of the talking, while her
father stood silently beside her.
The Mercers quickly lost patience with the established
organizations, however, and drifted to more controversial
causes, giving $1 million to a group running attack ads
against a proposed mosque in the vicinity of the World
Trade Center’s Ground Zero in lower Manhattan.11 Then,
in 2011, the Mercers met conservative firebrand Andrew
Breitbart at a conference. Almost immediately, they were
intrigued with his far-right news organization, Breitbart
News Network, expressing interest in funding its
operations. Breitbart introduced the Mercers to his friend,
Steve Bannon, a former Goldman Sachs banker, who drew
up a term sheet under which the Mercer family purchased
nearly 50 percent of Breitbart News for $10 million.
In March 2012, Breitbart collapsed on a Los Angeles
sidewalk and died of heart failure at the age of forty-three.
Bannon and the Mercers convened an emergency meeting
in New York to determine the network’s future, and
decided that Bannon would become the site’s executive
chairman. Over time, the site became popular with the
“alt-right,” a loose conglomeration of groups, some of
which embraced tenets of white supremacy and viewed
immigration and multiculturalism as threats. (Bannon
preferred to call himself an economic nationalist and
argued that racist elements would get “washed out” of the
populist movement.)
After Mitt Romney lost the 2012 presidential election,
the Mercers became even more disenchanted with the
establishment. That year, Rebekah stood up before a
crowd of Romney supporters at the University Club of

New York and delivered a scathing and detailed critique of
the Republican Party, arguing that its poor data and
canvassing operations held candidates back. Rebekah said
it was time to “save America from becoming like socialist
Europe.”12
Bannon helped broker a deal for Mercer to invest in
an analytics firm called Cambridge Analytica, the US arm
of the British behavioral research company SCL Group.
Cambridge Analytica specialized in the kinds of advanced
data Mercer was accustomed to parsing at Renaissance,
and the type of information that Rebekah said the GOP
lacked. She urged organizations that benefited from her
family’s funds to tap Cambridge’s sophisticated
technological capabilities.
In 2013, Patrick Caddell, a former Democratic pollster
who had turned critical of the party, shared data with Bob
Mercer suggesting that voters were becoming alienated
from both parties as well as most mainstream candidates.
Mercer asked Caddell to do another round of polling as he
collected his own data; Mercer concluded that a major
shift was under way.13
“My God, this is a whole new world,” he told Caddell.

=
In February 2014, Mercer and other conservative political
donors gathered at New York’s Pierre hotel to strategize
about the 2016 presidential election. He told attendees he
had seen data indicating that mainstream Republicans,
such as Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio, would have difficulty
winning. Only a true outsider with a sense of the voters’
frustrations could emerge victorious, Mercer argued.
Others didn’t seem as convinced by his data.
He and Rebekah began searching for an outsider to
shake up Washington.
“It’s a philosophical thing,” according to Caddell.
“They think the establishment has failed and is self-

serving.”
For guidance, the Mercers turned to Bannon. At the
time, Breitbart’s online traffic was soaring, validating their
faith in the political provocateur. When Mercer hosted
Bannon on his 203-foot yacht, Sea Owl—yet another owl
—Bannon wore shorts, cursed freely, belched, and held
forth like a close relation, according to some people
present. Bannon advised the Mercers on which political
and media ventures to invest in and escorted potential
beneficiaries to Rebekah’s triplex at Trump Place.*
Mercer’s impact extended across the Atlantic. After
Breitbart started an office in London, in 2012, it began
supporting politician and former commodity trader Nigel
Farage’s fledgling efforts to catapult the idea of the UK
leaving the European Union from a fringe issue to a
mainstream one. At some point, Mercer and Farage
became friendly.
In 2015, Cambridge Analytica discussed ways to help
the leaders of Leave.EU, the political group that supported
the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union. Bannon
was included as part of the email traffic between the two
groups, though it’s not clear he read or responded to the
emails. The following month, Leave.EU publicly launched
a campaign to persuade British voters to support a
referendum in favor of an exit from the European Union.
Cambridge Analytica officials would deny charging for
doing work for Leave.EU.14
“Even if the firm was not paid for its services, it laid
some of the early groundwork for the Leave.EU
campaign,” argues journalist Jane Mayer.15
In June 2016, the UK voted to exit the European
Union. Farage was one of the leaders of that campaign,
though Leave.EU wasn’t selected as the effort’s official
organization.
“Brexit could not have happened without Breitbart,”
Farage says.16

=
As the 2016 presidential campaign got under way, the
Mercers initially backed Texas Senator Ted Cruz, having
been impressed by his willingness to shut the government
down over debt concerns in 2013. They gave a pro-Cruz
super PAC more than $13 million, but when Cruz dropped
out of the race in May of that year, Rebekah accepted an
invitation to meet Donald Trump’s daughter Ivanka and
her husband, Jared Kushner, for lunch at Trump Tower.
Over sandwiches and salads, they bonded over parenting
young children, among other things.17
Soon, the Mercers shifted their support to Trump, by
then the party’s effective nominee. They launched a super
PAC to oppose Hillary Clinton, charging Kellyanne
Conway, a veteran Republican pollster, with running the
organization. Eventually, they’d become Trump’s largest
financial backers.
By the middle of the summer, Trump was losing
ground to Clinton and victory didn’t seem possible. On
Saturday, August 13, the New York Times published a
front-page story detailing the campaign’s ongoing chaos.
Trump wouldn’t use a teleprompter during his speeches,
he couldn’t stay on message, and he wasn’t able to tame
embarrassing leaks. Republican donors were jumping
ship, and a landslide victory for Clinton seemed possible,
even likely.
Later that day, Bob Mercer called Bannon, asking
what could be done to turn things around. Bannon
outlined a series of ideas, including making Conway a
more frequent presence on television to defend Trump.
“That sounds like a terrific idea,” Mercer said.
Later the same day, the Mercers boarded a helicopter
to the East Hampton beachfront estate of Woody
Johnson, the owner of the New York Jets, where GOP
backers, including Wall Street investors Carl Icahn and
Steve Mnuchin, were gathering to meet Trump. Clutching

the Times story, Rebekah made a beeline for the
candidate.
“It’s bad,” Trump acknowledged.
“No, it’s not bad—it’s over,” she told Trump. “Unless
you make a change.”
She told Trump she had a way for him to turn the
election around.
“Bring in Steve Bannon and Kellyanne Conway,” she
said. “I’ve talked to them; they’ll do it.”18
The next day, Bannon took an Uber to the Trump
National Golf Club in Bedminster, New Jersey. After
impatiently waiting for Trump to finish a round of golf,
eat some hot dogs, and then finish an ice-cream treat,
Bannon made his pitch.
“No doubt you can win,” Bannon told Trump. “You
just have to get organized.”
Before long, Bannon was running the campaign, and
Conway was its manager, becoming a ubiquitous and
effective television presence. Bannon helped instill order
on the campaign, making sure Trump focused on two
things—disparaging Clinton’s character and promoting a
form of nationalism that Bannon branded “America First,”
a slogan that seemed to echo the short-lived America First
Committee, a group that had levied pressure to prevent
the US from entering World War II and opposing Adolf
Hitler.
Bannon made headway on Trump’s current behavior,
but he couldn’t do anything about his past actions. On
October 7, the Washington Post broke a story about
outtake footage from the television show Access
Hollywood in which Trump bragged, in lewd and graphic
language, about kissing, groping, and trying to bed
women.
“When you’re a star, they let you do it,” Trump said.

Mainstream Republicans condemned Trump, but the
Mercers rushed out a full-throated statement of support.
“We are completely indifferent to Mr. Trump’s lockerroom braggadocio,” they said. “We have a country to save,
and there is only one person who can save it. We, and
Americans across the country and around the world, stand
steadfastly behind Donald J. Trump.”

=
Jim Simons was torn.
Ever since he and his childhood friend, Jim Harpel,
had driven across the country and witnessed some of the
hardships experienced by minorities and others, Simons
had leaned left politically. He sometimes supported
Republican candidates, but usually backed Democrats. By
the middle of 2016, Simons had emerged as the most
important supporter of the Democratic Party’s Priorities
USA Action super PAC and a key backer of Democratic
House and Senate candidates. By the end of that year,
Simons would donate more than $27 million to
Democratic causes. Marilyn Simons was even more liberal
than her husband, and Jim’s son, Nathaniel, had
established a nonprofit foundation focused on climate
change mitigation and clean-energy policy, issues the
Trump campaign generally mocked or ignored.
As Bob Mercer’s political influence grew, and his
support for the Trump campaign expanded, Simons began
hearing complaints from associates and others, most with
the same general request: Can’t you do something about
him?
Simons was in a difficult position. He only recently
had become aware of Mercer’s alliance with Bannon and
some of his other political opinions. Simons couldn’t
understand how a scientist could be so dismissive of the
threat of global warming, and he disagreed with Mercer’s
views. But Simons still liked Mercer. Yes, he was a bit

eccentric and frequently uncommunicative, but Mercer
had always been pleasant and respectful to Simons.
“He’s a nice guy,” he insisted to a friend. “He’s allowed
to use his money as he wishes. What can I do?”
Besides, Mercer was responsible for helping Medallion
achieve some of its most important breakthroughs.
Simons noted to some friends that it’s illegal to fire
someone for their political beliefs.
“Professional performance and political views” are two
separate things, Simons told someone.
Both Medallion and RIEF were enjoying strong
performance, and Mercer was doing a good job leading
Renaissance with Brown, who himself wasn’t devoting
much time on the election. Brown didn’t like spending his
money. He also told a friend that his wife’s experience in
government had helped sour him on politics. The election
might even help the hedge fund by bringing a dose of
volatility to financial markets, Brown told at least one
person.
Mercer remained an outlier at the firm, politically, and
there weren’t any obvious signs that Mercer’s outside
activities were having a negative effect on the firm,
reducing any impetus for Simons to act.
With time, that would change.

=
On Election Day, Trump’s team didn’t think he had a
chance of winning. The Republican data team projected
that Trump wouldn’t win more than 204 electoral votes,
and that he would get trounced in key battleground states.
Staffers and others in the campaign’s war room—a space
in Trump Tower that once housed the set for the television
show The Apprentice—were despondent. At 5:01 p.m.,
David Bossie, a close ally of Bannon and Conway who also
had been installed in the campaign at the behest of Bob

and Rebekah, received a phone call with early exit
numbers. Trump was down in eight of eleven crucial
states by 5 to 8 percentage points, he was told.
When the news was relayed to Trump, he snapped his
flip phone closed and threw it across the room.
“What a waste of time and money,” he said, to no one
in particular.
At around nine o’clock, Bob Mercer made his way to
the war room, wearing a posh three-piece gray suit.
Taking a look at his outfit, Bannon joked that someone
had invited Rich Uncle Pennybags, the Monopoly mascot.
Melania Trump joined the room, as did Trump’s children,
his running mate, Indiana Governor Mike Pence, New
Jersey Governor Chris Christie, and others. They ate pizza
and stared at a nearby wall that was mounted with six
seventy-five-inch televisions, all showing different
networks.
As more disappointing numbers came in, Trump
turned morose.
“Hey geniuses,” he said to his team, “how’s this
working for us?”
At one point, Fox News’s Tucker Carlson called in:
“He’s not going to win, will he?”
Then, the results began to turn. Around one o’clock,
Trump turned to Bossie, feeling elated: “Dave, can you
believe this? We just started this to have some fun.”
At 2:20 a.m., Conway received a call from an
Associated Press editor.
“What state are you calling?” she asked.
“We’re not calling a state,” he said. “We’re calling the
race.”19

=

As the election approached, Simons expressed concern.
Clinton led in most voter polls, but she seemed to be
making strategic miscalculations. Clinton’s team reached
out to Simons, saying that if he was going to make
additional political donations that year, he should direct
them to the party’s effort to win control of the Senate. The
Clinton camp seemed so confident of victory that they
deemed additional help for their own campaign
unnecessary.
On election night, Jim and Marilyn watched the
results at a friend’s home. The group, all Clinton
supporters, crowded around a television screen, nervous
but upbeat. As the results rolled in, and it slowly became
clear that Trump had a chance to win, the mood turned
dark. Around 9:30 p.m., Simons had had enough.
“I’m going back to the apartment to have a drink,” he
told Abe Lackman, his political advisor. “Want to come?”
Simons and Lackman quietly sipped red wine as they
watched Trump seal the election. Before midnight, they
turned the television off. They’d seen enough.
“We were pretty depressed,” Lackman says.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

W anxious faces staring at him.

hen Jim Simons looked up, there were dozens of

It was the morning of November 9, 2016, the day
after the presidential election. Nearly fifty scientists,
researchers, and other employees of the Simons
Foundation had spontaneously assembled in an open
space on the ninth floor of the foundation’s headquarters
in lower Manhattan. They were trying to come to grips
with what had just happened.
The space was sun-drenched, but almost everyone at
the impromptu gathering looked dour. They were
concerned about the nation’s future, as well as their own.
It was well known that Simons had been one of the
biggest supporters of Hillary Clinton’s presidential
campaign. Now the foundation’s employees worried that
the incoming Trump administration would target
charitable foundations, including Simons’s own. Some
wondered if the foundation’s tax-exempt status could be
stripped as a form of retribution.
The chatter ebbed as Simons, standing near a bank of
elevators in a blue blazer and tan chinos, began to speak.
In measured tones, he reminded the staffers of the
importance of their work. Researching autism,
understanding the origins of the universe, and pursuing
other worthy endeavors were long-term projects that
needed to proceed, Simons said. Keep working together
and try to ignore the political upheaval.
“We’re all disappointed,” Simons said. “The best we
can do is focus on our work.”

The employees slowly returned to their offices, some
newly reassured.

=
Simons was somber, but Bob Mercer was celebratory.
Mercer, his daughter, Rebekah, and the rest of the
family were preparing for their annual holiday party,
held in early December each year at the family’s Long
Island estate, Owl’s Nest. Mercer didn’t especially enjoy
speaking with colleagues or others. He was passionate
about his dress-up parties, however. Since 2009, the
family had welcomed hundreds of friends, business
associates, and others to their mansion for an elaborate,
themed costume affair.
Mercer’s more-sociable wife, Diana, was usually the
one at the center of the revelry. Mercer liked to sit in a
quiet corner with a grandchild or play poker with one of
the professional dealers hired for the evening.
This year’s festivities figured to be so special even
Mercer was expected to join in the fun. The chosen
theme was “Villains and Heroes,” and the evening’s
invitations featured a sword-wielding centurion
crouching in an ancient ruin, facing down a serpenthaired Medusa. The Mercers directed their guests to a
secret website where they received costume suggestions
from film, television, comic books, and everyday life,
including Superman, Captain Hook, and Mother Teresa.1
As the Saturday evening festivities began, investor
and Trump supporter Peter Thiel, dressed as Hulk
Hogan, mingled with Kellyanne Conway, who wore a
Superwoman costume. Steve Bannon came as himself, a
likely jab at those who deemed his insurgent political
activities to be villainous—or a suggestion that he was
the election’s hero. As for the Mercers, Bob was dressed
as Mandrake the Magician, a comic-book superhero

known for hypnotizing his targets, while Rebekah came
as Black Widow, covered head-to-toe in black latex.
Word spread that Donald Trump was on his way,
taking a break from transition meetings and pressing
cabinet decisions to join the group. A few years earlier,
Mercer was just another quirky quant. To the extent he
had a reputation, it was for collecting guns, backing a
urine-research enthusiast among other out-there causes,
and helping his enigmatic hedge fund beat the market.
Now the president-elect of the United States was making
the hike out to Long Island to pay homage to Mercer.
Between the $26 million he had spent on Republican
causes, his daughter’s insistence that Trump tap Bannon
and Conway to resuscitate his flailing campaign, and
Breitbart News’s unflinching support for the Trump
campaign, Bob and Rebekah Mercer were among those
most responsible for Trump’s shocking victory.2
“The Mercers laid the groundwork for the Trump
revolution,” Bannon said. “Irrefutably, when you look at
the donors during the past four years, they have had the
single biggest impact of anybody.”3
The president-elect and his entourage rolled up in
hulking, black sport utility vehicles, and Trump stepped
out wearing a black overcoat, dark suit, and a checkered
tie (but no costume). He made his way through the other
guests, stopping to greet Mercer, and soon was
addressing the crowd. Trump joked that he’d just had his
longest conversation with Mercer—“two words.”4 He
lauded Mercer’s support for his campaign and thanked
him and his daughter for urging that he hire Bannon,
Conway, and Bossie to lead the campaign, moves that
gave it needed “organization,” he said. Then, Trump
joined the Mercers, Bannon, and Conway at the party’s
head table.
In the aftermath of the election, Mercer focused on
running Renaissance, working as closely as ever with

Peter Brown. Mercer didn’t seem interested in an
ambassadorship or any of the other, obvious rewards
that often accrue to those backing the victors in
presidential elections. Still, Bannon was slated to become
the White House’s chief strategist, and Conway would
become a counselor to the president, ensuring that
Mercer would have unparalleled access to Trump.
Mercer remained one of the Republican Party’s most
important patrons and continued to control Breitbart
News, giving him influence over the party’s ascendant,
antiestablishment wing.
Rebekah Mercer assumed a more active role in the
new administration. For weeks, she was ensconced in
Bannon’s office in Trump Tower, serving as an advisor
on the selection of nominees to the Trump cabinet.
Mercer successfully lobbied for Senator Jeff Sessions to
be chosen as attorney general, pushed hard to prevent
Mitt Romney from becoming secretary of state, and
played a role in the choice of lawyer Jay Clayton to lead
the US Securities and Exchange Commission, even as her
influence raised some eyebrows due to her father’s
position as co-CEO of one of the nation’s largest hedge
funds. Later, the president turned to one of Rebekah
Mercer’s longtime associates, Leonard Leo, who ran the
conservative Federalist Society, for guidance on nearly
all of his judicial nominees. She also made plans to lead
an outside group designated to support Trump’s agenda.
Rebekah Mercer was emerging as a public figure in
her own right. Early that year, GQ magazine named
Mercer the seventeenth most powerful person in
Washington, DC, calling her “the First Lady of the altright.” The family’s political clout, along with its ongoing
support for the president-elect, seemed assured.

=
David Magerman was miserable.

Though he was a registered Democrat, Magerman
considered himself a political centrist and he sometimes
voted for Republican candidates. The 2016 campaign
was a different story, however. Trump had disparaged
immigrants, spoken of shifting funds from public schools
to charter schools, and promised to spend billions of
dollars to build a security wall on the Mexican border,
attitudes and policies that Magerman judged misguided
or even cruel. The candidate’s vow to restrict abortion
rights worried Magerman and horrified his wife, Debra.
After the election, Magerman unfriended almost
everyone he knew on Facebook, hoping to avoid painful
reminders of Trump’s victory.
After the inauguration, Magerman reconsidered his
position. He thought he might be able to move the
administration in a more benign direction. By then, the
forty-eight-year-old had spent a decade working on
education-related issues. He believed that his experience
might be helpful to Trump’s team, or that he might be
able to contribute in other areas.
In January, Magerman called Rebekah Mercer on
her cell phone, but she didn’t pick up. He tried her again,
leaving a message that he wanted to help. Magerman got
a return call, but it was from Bob Mercer. Despite his
usual shyness, Mercer seemed eager to discuss the merits
of Trump and various contentious political topics. They
disagreed about climate change, Obamacare, and the
value of a border wall, but their tone remained civil.
“He will blow things up,” Mercer said about Trump.
“That’s what I’m worried about,” Magerman said.
“Do you really want to bring back the fear of nuclear
war?” Magerman asked.
Mercer said he wasn’t all that concerned about
nuclear war. Before hanging up, Mercer said he had
enjoyed their back-and-forth, but Magerman was left
more frustrated than before.

He decided to wait to see what policies the new
administration embraced. He didn’t like what he saw. In
late January 2017, Trump signed an executive order
banning foreign nationals from seven predominantly
Muslim countries from visiting the US for ninety days
and suspending entry to the country for all Syrian
refugees. The Senate confirmed Sessions as attorney
general, and Trump continued to attack the credibility of
both the US intelligence community and members of the
media, actions that further irked Magerman.
Magerman wanted to do something to temper, or
even counteract, the administration’s policies, but he
wasn’t sure what to do. He made plans to donate to local
Democrats, and he called Planned Parenthood, offering
assistance to the nonprofit, which provides sexual health
care. Magerman also tried calling Jared Kushner,
Trump’s influential son-in-law—to warn him about
policies the administration was embracing and the
influence Mercer was having—but he failed to reach him.
Magerman was beset by guilt. Mercer’s foundation
was invested in the Medallion fund, so Magerman felt he
had personally helped provide Mercer with the resources
to put Trump in office and encourage policies that
Magerman found abhorrent.
“It pisses me off,” he told Debra, his anger boiling
over. “I’ve made software that makes white rich guys like
Mercer even richer.”
In phone calls with colleagues, Magerman
complained about how Mercer made the Trump
presidency possible. He shared a conversation he had
had years earlier with Mercer in which, he recalled,
Mercer argued that African Americans had been better
off before the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
which banned discrimination in public accommodations,
employment, and federally funded activities.

Word of Magerman’s criticism reached Mercer. One
day, as Magerman worked in his home office, his phone
rang.
“I hear you’re going around saying I’m a white
supremacist,” Mercer said. “That’s ridiculous.”
Magerman was caught off guard by the accusation.
“Those weren’t my exact words,” he told his boss,
stammering.
Magerman recovered his poise.
“That’s the impression I have, though,” Magerman
said, citing Mercer’s earlier comments about the Civil
Rights Act.
“I’m sure I never would have said that,” Mercer
responded.
Mercer then recited data that he claimed
demonstrated that African Americans enjoyed a better
standard of living in the decade before the legislation,
including statistics about the percentage of African
Americans in various professions. He promised to send
Magerman a book to prove his points.
The Civil Rights Act had “infantilized” African
Americans “by making them dependent on the
government,” Mercer told Magerman.
Now Magerman was really upset.
“Bob—they had to use different bathrooms and water
fountains!”
Magerman outlined his concerns about Trump’s
policy positions, rhetoric, and cabinet choices. Mercer
responded that he wasn’t involved in any decisions made
by Trump or those close to him; he simply had wanted to
prevent Clinton from being elected.
Now Magerman was really burning.

“How can you say you’re not involved?” Magerman
screamed, pointing to the group Rebekah Mercer had
formed to boost Trump’s agenda, as well as his continued
close relationships with Bannon and Conway.
“You should meet Bannon. He’s a sweet guy,” Mercer
said.
“If what you’re doing is harming the country, then
you have to stop!” Magerman told Mercer, before they
hung up.
Mercer didn’t seem especially perturbed by the
conversation. He was used to having it out with more
liberal members of his staff. For him, it was almost a
sport. A few days later, Mercer sent Magerman a book
called Civil Rights: Rhetoric or Reality? written in 1984
by Hoover Institution economist Thomas Sowell that the
New York Times had called “brutally frank, perceptive,
and important.” The book argues that minorities began
moving into higher-paying jobs in large numbers years
before the passage of the Civil Rights Act, and that
affirmative action had caused the most disadvantaged
segments of the minority population to fall behind their
white counterparts.5
Sowell’s argument “focuses on narrow financial
measures, but ignores overall human factors,”
Magerman says, citing one of many criticisms he and
others have of the book.
Magerman was unsettled by the conversation with
Mercer. He wanted to do something to stop his boss.
Magerman dug through Renaissance’s employee
handbook to see what discipline he might face if he aired
his concerns. He also spoke with Peter Brown and Mark
Silber, who said they doubted Mercer had made racist
comments. (Another executive joked that Mercer didn’t
speak enough for anyone to know if he was a racist.)
Magerman understood from those conversations that he

was likely on safe ground criticizing Mercer if he steered
clear of saying anything about Renaissance.
In February, Magerman sent an email to a Wall
Street Journal reporter.*
“I’m ready to take action,” he wrote. “Enough is
enough.”
In the resulting interview, conducted at a restaurant
Magerman owned in Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania, he held
little back.
“His views show contempt for the social safety net
that he doesn’t need, but many Americans do,”
Magerman said. “Now he’s using the money I helped him
make to implement his worldview” by supporting Trump
and proposing that “government be shrunk down to the
size of a pinhead.”
Magerman shared concern about his own future.
“I’d like to think I’m speaking out in a way that won’t
risk my job, but it’s very possible they could fire me,” he
said. “This is my life’s work—I ran a group that wrote the
trading system they still use.”
The morning an online version of the story appeared
on the paper’s website, Magerman received a phone call
from Renaissance. A representative told Magerman that
he was being suspended without pay and was prohibited
from having any contact with the company.

=
The election was starting to cause discomfort for Mercer,
as well.
He and his daughter had become so closely
associated with Bannon and the far-right segment of the
Republican Party that they had become targets for those
unhappy with the nation’s lurch to the right.

At one point, the New York State Democratic
Committee ran a television advertisement flashing Bob
and Rebekah Mercer’s faces on the screen, saying they
were the “same people who bankrolled Trump’s social
media bot army and Steve Bannon’s extremist Breitbart
News.”
In March 2017, about sixty demonstrators gathered
outside Mercer’s home, decrying his funding of far-right
causes and calling for higher taxes on the wealthy. A
week later, a second group held a protest, some holding
signs reading: “Mercer Pay Your Taxes.” Police officers
closed the road in front of Owl’s Nest to accommodate
the protesters, who stood in the pouring rain for hours
chanting criticisms of Mercer.
Mercer “played a major role in bringing about the
election of Donald Trump,” said Bill McNulty, an eightytwo-year-old local resident who joined the group. “We
saw the corrosive and contaminating effect of dark
money on politics.”6
The Mercers received death threats, friends said,
forcing the family to hire security. For a family that
relished its privacy, their growing infamy was both
shocking and disturbing.

=
Renaissance didn’t know what to do with Magerman.
The firm rarely fires employees, even when they’re
unproductive, disinterested, or difficult. The risk is just
too great. Even lackluster, midlevel researchers and
programmers are privy to insights and understandings
that may prove helpful to rivals. That was one reason
Magerman felt comfortable speaking out about Mercer—
he had seen others show insubordination without facing
consequences. Yet, Magerman had committed a cardinal
sin for any employee: He had attacked his boss in as

public a fashion as possible, even suggesting he was
racist. And there were few companies as publicity-shy as
Renaissance—one reason many at the firm were
reluctant to welcome Magerman back.
Magerman had mixed feelings of his own. He had
made so much money at the firm that he didn’t have to
worry about the financial pain of getting fired. He
loathed what Mercer was doing to the country and
wanted to stop his political activity. But Magerman also
remembered how kind Mercer and his wife had been to
him when he first joined the firm, inviting him to dinners
at Friendly’s and movie nights with their family.
Magerman respected Bob for his intelligence and
creativity, and a big part of him still yearned to please
the powerful men in his life. At that point, Magerman
had spent two decades at Renaissance and he felt an
appreciation for the firm. He decided that if he could go
on speaking about Mercer’s politics, he’d return to his
old job.
As he discussed his future with Brown and others,
Magerman didn’t make it easy on them.
“I can’t take hush money,” he told them.
At one point, Magerman paid a visit to the Long
Island office and was hurt that so many staffers seemed
unfriendly. No one wanted to jeopardize their position at
the firm by lending Magerman support, it seemed. Either
that, or even left-leaning staffers thought he went about
his protest the wrong way.
“People I expected to be warm and fuzzy were
standoffish,” he said after the encounter. “They see me as
the bad guy.”
Overcoming imposing obstacles, the two sides
worked out a tentative agreement for Magerman to
return to the fold, with conditions placed on what he
could say about Mercer. The deal wasn’t finalized,
though. To help repair the relationship, Magerman

decided to attend an April 20 poker tournament at New
York’s St. Regis hotel benefiting Math for America, the
nonprofit that Simons had founded. The event was a
highly anticipated annual showdown for quants,
professional poker players, and others. Magerman knew
Simons, Mercer, Brown, and other Renaissance
executives would be there. Who knew, maybe Rebekah
Mercer would show up?
“I wanted to reintroduce myself and be part of the
culture again,” Magerman says, “to show I was making
an effort.”
As Magerman made the three-hour drive from his
home, he began feeling anxious. He was unsure how he’d
be received by his colleagues or others in attendance. At
the hotel, Magerman pledged $5,000 to enter the
tournament. He immediately noticed he hadn’t dressed
appropriately. Most of the approximately two hundred
players in the carpeted, second-floor ballroom wore suits
or sports jackets. The security team wore tuxedos.
Magerman went with jeans and an open-collared dress
shirt. It was a mistake that added to his discomfort and
apprehension.
Magerman entered the poker room and immediately
saw Bob Mercer. This was no time to be shy, Magerman
thought. He walked right up to Mercer and
complimented him on the color of his suit, which was an
unusual shade of blue. Mercer smiled and said one of his
daughters had picked it out, an exchange that seemed to
go well.
Phew, Magerman thought.
Just after seven p.m., Magerman began playing NoLimit Hold’em at a table with Simons, a member of the
Poker Hall of Fame named Dan Harrington, and a few
others. When Simons ducked into a side room to smoke,
Magerman followed. He apologized for the negative

attention thrust on the firm after his criticism of the
Mercers.
“I’m sorry how things played out,” Magerman told
Simons. “I respect you and want you to know that.”
Simons accepted the apology and said their standoff
seemed to be coming to a resolution, further buoying
Magerman. Back at his table, Magerman lost some early
hands but remained in good spirits, pledging an
additional $15,000 for buy-ins so he could continue
playing.
A few tables away, Mercer was playing against some
investors and others, including sport-finance executive
Chris English. Mercer won several early hands, but
English detected a tell: When Mercer played a great
hand, he whistled patriotic songs, including “The Battle
Hymn of the Republic.” When he was less confident of
his cards, Mercer hummed those songs. Seizing on his
discovery, English quickly won a pot over Mercer.
Magerman was on his own losing streak. Around
10:30 p.m., after consuming several glasses of twelveyear-old scotch, Magerman was out of the tournament. It
was too early to go home, though, and he was still on a
high from the looming rapprochement with his
colleagues, so Magerman decided to walk the room and
watch others play.
He approached a table that included Rebekah
Mercer. She was staring at him. As Magerman got a little
closer, Mercer became agitated. She called to him in
anger: “Karma is a bitch.”
Shaken, Magerman walked around the table and
stood next to Mercer. She told Magerman that his
criticism of the Mercers’ support for Trump had put her
family in danger.
“How could you do this to my father? He was so good
to you,” she said.

Magerman said he felt bad, noting that her family
had played a supportive role when he joined
Renaissance.
“I loved your family,” Magerman told Mercer.
She wouldn’t hear it.
“You’re pond scum,” Mercer told him, repeatedly.
“You’ve been pond scum for twenty-five years. I’ve
always known it.”
Get out of here, she told Magerman. A security
member approached, telling Magerman to back away
from the table. He refused, dodged the security detail,
and approached Simons, asking for help.
“Jim, look what they’re trying to do to me,”
Magerman called out.
It’s best if you left the event, Simons told him.
Security forced Magerman outside to the curb,
threatening to call the police if he didn’t leave. Boaz
Weinstein, another hedge-fund investor, saw how
distraught Magerman was and urged him to walk off his
drinks and drive home. It took some convincing, but
Magerman complied, heading for his car.
“I’m not denying I was a little impacted by the
alcohol. . . . It wasn’t one of my finest moments. It wasn’t
my intent to create a scene,” Magerman said several days
after the event. “But that doesn’t change what she said to
me . . . I didn’t start the fight, and I didn’t resort to the
petty name calling.”
Back upstairs, players buzzed about the
confrontation, but the tournament went on. Soon, Bob
Mercer was on a tear, rebounding from his earlier
setback. Simons, Peter Muller of PDT Partners, and
Brown all exited play, but Mercer kept on going. In the
evening’s last big pot, at around one a.m., he knocked
English out of the tournament.

“He might have been humming to reverse his tell,”
English says, trying to explain his loss. “It was so loud, I
couldn’t tell.”7
As Mercer smiled and accepted congratulations from
his rivals, Magerman was on his way back to
Philadelphia. Along the way, he received a text from
Brown: “Best to rise above all this and just live your life
without getting caught up in a battle. I honestly think
you will be happier.”
On April 29, Renaissance fired Magerman.

=
By the early fall of 2017, Anthony Calhoun’s anger had
intensified. The more the executive director of the
Baltimore City Fire and Police Employees’ Retirement
System read about Mercer’s political activities, the more
they bothered him.
Backing Trump wasn’t the problem for Calhoun. It
was Breitbart, which had become associated with white
nationalists. By then, Bannon had been pushed out of his
job as the chief strategist to the president. Now he was
back at Breitbart, and some expected him to push the
publication to further extremes.
Mercer also had backed Milo Yiannopoulos, a rightwing provocateur who had called feminism a “cancer,”
once appeared to endorse pedophilia, and was barred
from Twitter for abusing others.8
It was all too much for Calhoun. The Baltimore
retirement system had $25 million invested in RIEF, and
Calhoun decided to share his displeasure with
Renaissance.
He picked up the phone and called a RIEF
representative.
“We’ve got real concerns,” Calhoun said.

The representative said Calhoun wasn’t the only one
calling with complaints about Mercer. Later, when
Calhoun began speaking with industry consultants, he
heard other Renaissance clients were sharing their own
unhappiness with the firm. Soon, Calhoun and the rest of
the board of directors of the Baltimore retirement system
voted to pull its money out of RIEF.
The cash was a tiny part of the Renaissance fund,
and no one at the firm was worried about any kind of
exodus of investors. But in October, nearly fifty
protesters picketed the hedge fund itself, saying Mercer
was their target, adding to the discomfort of executives,
who weren’t accustomed to such negative publicity.
By October 2017, Simons was worried the
controversy was jeopardizing Renaissance’s future. The
firm’s morale was deteriorating. At least one key
employee was close to quitting, while another mulled a
departure. Among the most important employees to
convey their concerns was Wolfgang Wander,* who had
earned his PhD in high-energy physics at the University
of Erlangen–Nuremberg in Bavaria, Germany. Wander
headed the firm’s infrastructure group, effectively
making him Renaissance’s most senior technology
officer. Simons became convinced that Renaissance
would have a tougher time competing for talent.
For more than a year, Simons had ignored Mercer’s
growing role in politics. Now, he felt compelled to act.
On a crisp October morning, Simons dropped by
Mercer’s office. He said he had an important matter he
needed to discuss. Simons sat in a chair opposite Mercer
and came quickly to the point of his visit.
“I think it’s best if you stepped down,” Simons told
Mercer.
It wasn’t a political decision but one made to ensure
the firm’s future.

The scrutiny on the firm “isn’t good for morale,”
Simons said.
Mercer wasn’t prepared for the news. He looked sad
and hurt. Nonetheless, he accepted Simons’s decision
without protest.
Later, Simons told a group of students and others at
MIT’s business school that “there was a problem of
morale at Renaissance . . . morale was getting worse.”
“It wasn’t an easy decision,” Simons later told a
friend.

=
On November 2, Mercer wrote a letter to Renaissance
investors saying he was resigning as Renaissance’s coCEO but would remain a researcher at the firm. He
blamed “scrutiny from the press” and said the media had
unfairly linked him to Bannon.
“The press has . . . intimated that my politics
marches in lockstep with Steve Bannon’s,” he wrote. “I
have great respect for Mr. Bannon, and from time to time
I do discuss politics with him. However, I make my own
decisions with respect to whom I support politically.”
Mercer, who said he had decided to sell his stake in
Breitbart News to his daughters, clarified his political
views in the letter, saying he supports “conservatives
who favor a smaller, less powerful government.” He also
said that he had supported Yiannopoulos in an effort to
back free speech and open debate, but that he regretted
the move and was in the process of severing ties with
him.
“In my opinion, actions of and statements by Mr.
Yiannopoulos have caused pain and divisiveness,”
Mercer wrote.

=
In early 2018, a few months after stepping down from his
job, Mercer received a call from Robert Frey, the former
Renaissance executive who, after leaving the company,
had founded a quantitative finance program at Stony
Brook University’s College of Engineering and Applied
Sciences. Frey invited Mercer to lunch at a nondescript
restaurant within the nearby Hilton Garden Inn, the only
restaurant on Stony Brook’s campus with waiter service.
As they sat down, a couple of students recognized Frey
and said hello, but no one seemed to notice Mercer, a
likely relief to him.
Mercer looked drained. Frey knew his old friend had
gone through a difficult year, so he wanted to get
something out of the way before the food arrived.
During the election, Frey was unhappy with both
candidates, and he couldn’t bring himself to vote for
either Trump or Clinton. Nonetheless, he told Mercer
that he was fully within his right to actively support
Trump in any way he saw fit, adding that, despite the
widespread criticism, he didn’t believe Mercer had done
anything improper.
“There’s been an imbalance in how you were
treated,” Frey told Mercer. “Soros and other people
influence politics as much as you do, but they aren’t
vilified like you are.”
Mercer smiled, gave a nod, but, as usual, didn’t say
much in response.
“Thanks,” Mercer replied.
Mercer’s reaction gave Frey the feeling that he
should change the subject. The friends talked about math
and the market, steering clear of politics for the rest of
the meal.
“I felt bad for him,” Frey says.

=
Rebekah Mercer was having an even harder time of it.
Mercer shared frustrations with friends about how
she and her father had been portrayed and said some
unfairly accused her of supporting racist causes. The
criticism had sparked a backlash. According to a friend,
she once received fecal matter in the mail. Another time,
a stranger insulted her in public, leaving her shaking.
In January 2018, more than two hundred scientists
and other academics who supported policy action to stop
climate change endorsed an open letter calling on the
American Museum of Natural History, New York City’s
most prominent science museum, to remove Mercer
from its board, on which she had served for five years.
They urged the museum to “end ties to the anti-science
propagandists and funders of climate science
misinformation.” Over a dozen protesters marched
outside of the museum on Manhattan’s Upper West Side,
carrying placards saying, “Get Rebekah Out of Our
Museum,” and “Climate Change Is Real.”9
The museum never took any action, but, in February
2018, Mercer felt the need to shift public perception. She
wrote an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal denying that
she supported “toxic ideologies such as racism and antiSemitism,” adding that she believed in “a kind and
generous United States.”
A month later, a new controversy erupted when
Cambridge Analytica was accused of acquiring the
private Facebook data of millions of users, setting off a
series of government inquiries. Mercer, who was on
Cambridge’s board of directors and helped oversee the
company’s operations, came in for a new round of
scrutiny and negative media coverage.
By the middle of 2018, Bob and Rebekah Mercer
were pulling back from politics. The Mercers had broken

with Bannon soon after he was quoted making a critical
comment about Trump’s family, leaving the Mercers
without a political consigliere. In the lead-up to the 2018
midterm elections, Mercer made just under $6 million in
disclosed political contributions, down from almost $10
million in the previous midterm elections in 2014, and
over $25 million in 2016.
“They’ve fallen off the grid,” a leading member of the
conservative movement said of the Mercers in late 2018.
“We don’t hear much from them.”
Friends said the unexpected blowback they each
experienced prompted a shift to a lower-key approach,
with smaller political contributions and little regular
communication with Trump or members of his
administration.
“They were so much more successful in the political
arena than they expected, it took off like a rocket,” said
Brent Bozell, a friend who runs the Media Research
Center, a conservative nonprofit. “There’s bitterness . . .
people have disappointed them.”10
Part of the reason for the disappointment, friends
said, was that most of the biggest donors to the Trump
campaign received something for their generosity. The
Mercers never asked for anything. Yet, other financial
executives—even those who hadn’t supported Trump
during his presidential run, such as Blackstone Group
Chief Executive Stephen Schwarzman—were the ones
regularly speaking with the president.
The Mercers also made strategic flubs. In June 2018,
Bob Mercer gave half a million dollars to a political
action committee backing Kelli Ward, who drew
criticism for accusing the family of Senator John McCain
for timing the announcement of the end of McCain’s
cancer treatment to undercut her campaign. Ward was
trounced in that year’s Arizona Republican Senate
primary.

As the president and the Republican Party began
gearing up for the 2020 election, the Mercers remained
well positioned to influence the campaign. They still
were close to Conway. And, while they no longer had
Bannon as a conduit to communicate to Trump or
others, the Mercers were big backers of a PAC that had
supported US National Security Advisor John Bolton,
maintaining their access to power. The Mercers told
friends they were happy the Trump administration had
cut taxes and chosen conservative judges, among other
moves, suggesting they didn’t regret becoming so
involved in national politics.
Still, Rebekah Mercer seemed more focused on other
issues, most far from the headlines, such as working to
boost free speech on college campuses.
In October 2018, when she was honored at a
Washington, DC, gala, Mercer shared concerns about the
level of discourse on college campuses, saying schools
“churn out a wave of ovine zombies steeped in the antiAmerican myths of the radical left, ignorant of basic
civics, economics, and history, and completely unfit for
critical thinking.”11
Wearing a red, flowing gown and her distinctive
diamond-studded glasses as she spoke to hundreds in
the hall, Mercer served notice that she would continue to
push to limit the role of government and make sure
politicians emphasized “personal responsibility.”
Calling President Trump “a force of nature,” Mercer
indicated that she’d continue to play an active role in the
nation’s politics, no matter the backlash she and her
father had endured, and would remain involved in “the
struggle for the soul of our country.”
“I will not be silenced,” she said.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Never send a human to do a machine’s job.
Agent Smith in the film The Matrix

T worried.

he stock market was collapsing and Jim Simons was

It was late December 2018, and Simons and his wife,
Marilyn, were at the Beverly Hills Hotel visiting family in
the Los Angeles area over the Christmas holiday. Simons,
dressed in chino pants and a polo shirt, was trying to
relax in a hotel famous for its poolside bungalows and
pink-and-green décor, but he couldn’t stop watching the
stock market. It was tumbling amid growing concerns
about an economic downturn. That month, the S&P 500
index fell nearly 10 percent, the worst December
performance since 1931.
At that point, Simons was worth about $23 billion.
Somehow, though, each day’s loss felt like a fresh punch
to the gut. Part of it was that Simons had made
substantial financial commitments to his charitable
foundation, which employed hundreds of staffers, and
other organizations. That wasn’t really why he was so
dismayed, though. Simons knew he’d be more than fine
no matter what happened with the market. He just hated
losing money, and he was growing anxious about when
the pain would stop.
Simons reached for a phone to call Ashvin Chhabra, a
Wall Street veteran hired to run Euclidean Capital, a firm
managing the personal money of Simons and his family.
Simons told Chhabra he was concerned about the
market’s outlook. It seemed like a good idea to place
some negative bets against stocks, moves that would

serve as protection in case the sell-off got even worse.
Simons asked Chhabra’s opinion about what they should
do.
“Should we be selling short?” Simons asked.
Chhabra hesitated, suggesting that they avoid acting
until the market had calmed, a course of action Simons
agreed to follow. A day later, stocks firmed. The collapse
was over.
Hanging up, neither Simons nor Chhabra focused on
the rich irony of their exchange. Simons had spent more
than three decades pioneering and perfecting a new way
to invest. He had inspired a revolution in the financial
world, legitimizing a quantitative approach to trading. By
then, it seemed everyone in the finance business was
trying to invest the Renaissance way: digesting data,
building mathematical models to anticipate the direction
of various investments, and employing automated
trading systems. The establishment had thrown in the
towel. Today, even banking giant JPMorgan Chase puts
hundreds of its new investment bankers and investment
professionals through mandatory coding lessons.
Simons’s success had validated the field of quantitative
investing.
“Jim Simons and Renaissance showed it was
possible,” says Dario Villani, a PhD in theoretical physics
who runs his own hedge fund.
The goal of quants like Simons was to avoid relying
on emotions and gut instinct. Yet, that’s exactly what
Simons was doing after a few difficult weeks in the
market. It was a bit like Oakland A’s executive Billy
Beane scrapping his statistics to draft a player with the
clear look of a star.
Simons’s phone call is a stark reminder of how
difficult it can be to turn decision-making over to
computers, algorithms, and models—even, at times, for
the inventors of these very approaches. His conversation

with Chhabra helps explain the faith investors have long
placed in stock-and-bond pickers dependent on
judgment, experience, and old-fashioned research.
By 2019, however, confidence in the traditional
approach had waned. Years of poor performance had
investors fleeing actively managed stock-mutual funds,
or those professing an ability to beat the market’s
returns. At that point, these funds, most of which
embrace traditional approaches to investing, controlled
just half of the money entrusted by clients in stockmutual funds, down from 75 percent a decade earlier.
The other half of the money was in index funds and other
so-called passive vehicles, which simply aim to match the
market’s returns, acknowledging how challenging it is to
top the market.1
Increasingly, it seemed, once-dependable investing
tactics, such as grilling corporate managers, scrutinizing
balance sheets, and using instinct and intuition to bet on
major global economic shifts, amounted to too little.
Sometimes, those methods helped cripple the
reputations of some of Wall Street’s brightest stars. In
the years leading up to 2019, John Paulson, who made
billions predicting the 2007 subprime-credit crisis,
suffered deep losses and shocking client defections.2
David Einhorn, a poker-playing hedge-fund manager
once known as “King David” for anticipating Lehman
Brothers’ 2008 collapse, saw his own clients bolt amid
poor performance.3
In Newport Beach, California, Bill Gross, an investor
known to chafe when employees at bond powerhouse
PIMCO spoke or even made eye contact with him, saw
his returns slip ahead of his shocking departure from the
firm.4 Even Warren Buffett’s performance waned. His
Berkshire Hathaway trailed the S&P 500 over the
previous five, ten, and fifteen years leading up to May
2019.

Part of the problem was that traditional, actively
managed funds no longer wielded an information
advantage over their rivals. Once, sophisticated hedge
funds, mutual funds, and others had the luxury of poring
over annual reports and other financial releases to
uncover useful nuggets of overlooked information.
Today, almost any type of corporate financial figure is a
keystroke or news feed away, and can be captured
instantly by machines. It’s almost impossible to identify
facts or figures not fully appreciated by rival investors.
At the same time, a crackdown on insider trading, as
well as a series of regulatory changes aimed at ensuring
that certain investors couldn’t obtain better access to
corporate information, resulted in a more even playing
field, reducing the advantages wielded by even the most
sophisticated fundamental investors. No longer could
big hedge funds receive calls from brokers advising them
of the imminent announcement of a piece of news, or
even a shift in the bank’s own view on a stock.
Today, the fastest-moving firms often hold an edge.
In late August 2018, shares of a small cancer-drug
company called Geron Corporation soared 25 percent
after its partner, Johnson & Johnson, posted a job
listing. The opening suggested that a key regulatory
decision for a drug the two companies were developing
might be imminent, a piece of news that escaped all but
those with the technology to instantly and automatically
scour for job listings and similar real-time information.5
Quant investors had emerged as the dominant
players in the finance business. As of early 2019, they
represented close to a third of all stock-market trades, a
share that had more than doubled since 2013.6
Spoils have accrued from that dominance. In 2018,
Simons made an estimated $1.5 billion, while the
founders of rival quant firm Two Sigma Investments
earned $700 million each. Ray Dalio of Bridgewater

Associates—which is a systematic, rules-based
investment firm, but not quantitative—made $1 billion,
as well. Israel Englander, Simons’s combatant in the
fight over the two renegade Russian traders, pulled in
$500 million.7
In early 2019, Ken Griffin, who focuses on quant and
other strategies at his Chicago-based firm, Citadel,
dropped jaws after he spent $238 million for a New York
penthouse, the most expensive home ever sold in the
country. (Griffin already had purchased several floors of
a Chicago condominium for nearly $60 million, as well
as a Miami penthouse for the same amount, not to
mention $500 million for a pair of paintings by Jackson
Pollock and Willem de Kooning.)
There are reasons to think the advantages that firms
like Renaissance enjoy will only expand amid an
explosion of new kinds of data that their computertrading models can digest and parse. IBM has estimated
that 90 percent of the world’s data sets have been created
in the last two years alone, and that forty zettabytes—or
forty-four trillion gigabytes—of data will be created by
2020, a three-hundred-fold increase from 2005.8
Today, almost every kind of information is digitized
and made available as part of huge data sets, the kinds
that investors once only dreamed of tapping. The rage
among investors is for alternative data, which includes
just about everything imaginable, including instant
information from sensors and satellite images around
the world. Creative investors test for money-making
correlations and patterns by scrutinizing the tones of
executives on conference calls, traffic in the parking lots
of retail stores, records of auto-insurance applications,
and recommendations by social media influencers.
Rather than wait for figures on agricultural
production, quants examine sales of farm equipment or
satellite images of crop yields. Bills of lading for cargo

containers can give a sense of global shifts. Systematic
traders can even get cell phone–generated data on which
aisles, and even which shelves, consumers are pausing to
browse within stores. If you seek a sense of the
popularity of a new product, Amazon reviews can be
scraped. Algorithms are being developed to analyze the
backgrounds of commissioners and others at the Food
and Drug Administration to predict the likelihood of a
new drug’s approval.
To explore these new possibilities, hedge funds have
begun to hire a new type of employee, what they call
data analysts or data hunters, who focus on digging up
new data sources, much like what Sandor Straus did for
Renaissance in the mid-1980s. All the information is
crunched to get a better sense of the current state and
trajectory of the economy, as well as the prospects of
various companies. More adventurous investors may
even use it to prepare for a potential crisis if, say, they
see a series of unusual pizza deliveries at the Pentagon in
the midst of an international incident.
Exponential growth in computer processing power
and storage capabilities has given systematic traders new
capabilities to sift through all that data. According to
Singularity Hub, by around 2025, $1,000 will likely buy
a computer with the same processing power as the
human brain. Already, hedge-fund firm Two Sigma has
built a computing system with more than one hundred
teraflops of power—meaning it can process one hundred
trillion calculations a second—and more than eleven
petabytes of memory, the equivalent of five times the
data stored in all US academic libraries.9
All that power allows quants to find and test many
more predictive signals than ever before.
“Instead of the hit-and-miss strategy of trying to find
signals using creativity and thought,” a Renaissance
computer specialist says, “now you can just throw a class

of formulas at a machine-learning engine and test out
millions of different possibilities.”
Years after Simons’s team at Renaissance adopted
machine-learning techniques, other quants have begun
to embrace these methods. Renaissance anticipated a
transformation in decision-making that’s sweeping
almost every business and walk of life. More companies
and individuals are accepting and embracing models that
continuously learn from their successes and failures. As
investor Matthew Granade has noted, Amazon, Tencent,
Netflix, and others that rely on dynamic, ever-changing
models are emerging dominant. The more data that’s fed
to the machines, the smarter they’re supposed to
become.
A quip by novelist Gary Shteyngart sums up the
future path of the finance industry, and the direction of
broader society: “When the shrinks for their kids are
replaced by algorithms, that’ll be the end; there’ll be
nothing left.”

=
For all the enthusiasm building around the quantitative
approach, its limitations also are clear. It’s not easy to
process the information and discover accurate signals in
all that noisy data. Some quants have argued that picking
stocks is harder for a machine than choosing an
appropriate song, recognizing a face, or even driving a
car. It remains hard to teach machines to distinguish
between a blueberry muffin and a Chihuahua.
Some big firms, including London’s Man AHL,
mostly use machine-learning algorithms to determine
how and when to make their trades, or to map
connections between companies and do other kinds of
research, rather than to develop automated investment
decisions.

For all the advantages quant firms have, the
investment returns of most of these trading firms haven’t
been that much better than those of traditional firms
doing old-fashioned research, with Renaissance and a
few others the obvious exceptions. In the five years
leading up to spring of 2019, quant-focused hedge funds
gained about 4.2 percent a year on average, compared
with a gain of 3.3 percent for the average hedge fund in
the same period. (These figures don’t include results
from secretive funds that don’t share their results, like
Medallion.) Quantitative investors face daunting
challenges because the information they sift is always
changing—unlike data in other fields, such as physics—
and pricing histories for stocks and other investments
are relatively limited.
“Say you’re trying to predict how stocks will perform
over a one-year horizon,” Richard Dewey, a veteran
quant, says. “Because we only have decent records back
to 1900, there are only 118 nonoverlapping one-year
periods to look at in the US.”10
And it can be hard to build a trading system for some
kinds of investments, such as troubled debt—which relies
on judge rulings, legal maneuverings, and creditor
negotiations. For those reasons, there likely will remain
pockets of the market where savvy traditional investors
prosper, especially those focused on longer-term
investing that algorithmic, computer-driven investors
tend to shy away from.

=
The rise of Renaissance and other computerprogrammed traders has bred concern about their
impact on the market and the potential for a sudden selloff, perhaps sparked by computers acting autonomously.
On May 6, 2010, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
plummeted one thousand points in what came to be

known as the “flash crash,” a harrowing few minutes in
which hundreds of stocks momentarily lost nearly all
their value. Investors pointed the finger at computerprogrammed trading firms and said the collapse
highlighted the destabilizing role computerized trading
can play, but the market quickly rebounded. Prosecutors
later charged a trader operating out of his West London
home for manipulating a stock-market-index futures
contract, laying the groundwork for the decline.11
To some, the sudden downturn, which was
accompanied by little news to explain the move,
suggested the rise of the machine had ushered in a new
era of risk and volatility. Automated trading by
computers is a scary concept for many, much as
airplanes flown by autopilot and self-driving cars can
frighten, despite evidence that those machines improve
safety. There’s reason to believe computer traders can
amplify or accelerate existing trends.
Author and former risk manager Richard Bookstaber
has argued that risks today are significant because the
embrace of quant models is “system-wide across the
investment world,” suggesting that future troubles for
these investors would have more impact than in the
past.12 As more embrace quantitative trading, the very
nature of financial markets could change. New types of
errors could be introduced, some of which have yet to be
experienced, making them harder to anticipate. Until
now, markets have been driven by human behavior,
reflecting the dominant roles played by traders and
investors. If machine learning and other computer
models become the most influential factors in markets,
they may become less predictable and maybe even less
stable, since human nature is roughly constant while the
nature of this kind of computerized trading can change
rapidly.
The dangers of computerized trading are generally
overstated, however. There are so many varieties of

quant investing that it is impossible to generalize about
the subject. Some quants employ momentum strategies,
so they intensify the selling by other investors in a
downtown. But other approaches—including smart beta,
factor investing, and style investing—are the largest and
fastest-growing investment categories in the quant
world. Some of these practitioners have programmed
their computers to buy when stocks get cheap, helping to
stabilize the market.
It’s important to remember that market participants
have always tended to pull back and do less trading
during market crises, suggesting that any reluctance by
quants to trade isn’t so very different from past
approaches. If anything, markets have become more
placid as quant investors have assumed dominant
positions. Humans are prone to fear, greed, and outright
panic, all of which tend to sow volatility in financial
markets. Machines could make markets more stable, if
they elbow out individuals governed by biases and
emotions. And computer-driven decision-making in
other fields, such as the airline industry, has generally
led to fewer mistakes.

=
By the summer of 2019, Renaissance’s Medallion fund
had racked up average annual gains, before investor fees,
of about 66 percent since 1988, and a return after fees of
approximately 39 percent. Despite RIEF’s early
stumbles, the firm’s three hedge funds open for outside
investors have also outperformed rivals and market
indexes. In June 2019, Renaissance managed a
combined $65 billion, making it one of the largest hedgefund firms in the world, and sometimes represented as
much as 5 percent of daily stock-market trading volume,
not including high-frequency traders.

The firm’s success is a useful reminder of the
predictability of human behavior. Renaissance studies
the past because it is reasonably confident investors will
make similar decisions in the future. At the same time,
staffers embrace the scientific method to combat
cognitive and emotional biases, suggesting there’s value
to this philosophical approach when tackling challenging
problems of all kinds. They propose hypotheses and then
test, measure, and adjust their theories, trying to let
data, not intuition and instinct, guide them.
“The approach is scientific,” Simons says. “We use
very rigorous statistical approaches to determine what
we think is underlying.”13
Another lesson of the Renaissance experience is that
there are more factors and variables influencing financial
markets and individual investments than most realize or
can deduce. Investors tend to focus on the most basic
forces, but there are dozens of factors, perhaps whole
dimensions of them, that are missed. Renaissance is
aware of more of the forces that matter, along with the
overlooked mathematical relationships that affect stock
prices and other investments, than most anyone else.
It’s a bit like how bees see a broad spectrum of colors
in flowers, a rainbow that humans are oblivious to when
staring at the same flora. Renaissance doesn’t see all the
market’s hues, but they see enough of them to make a lot
of money, thanks in part to the firm’s reliance on ample
amounts of leverage. Renaissance has endured
challenging periods in the past, however, and it stands to
reason that the firm will find it difficult to match its past
success as markets evolve and staffers try to keep up. In
moments of honest reflection, current and former
employees marvel at their gains and acknowledge the
hurdles ahead.
The gains Simons and his colleagues have achieved
might suggest there are more inefficiencies in the market
than most assume. In truth, there likely are fewer

inefficiencies and opportunities for investors than
generally presumed. For all the unique data, computer
firepower, special talent, and trading and riskmanagement expertise Renaissance has gathered, the
firm only profits on barely more than 50 percent of its
trades, a sign of how challenging it is to try to beat the
market—and how foolish it is for most investors to try.
Simons and his colleagues generally avoid predicting
pure stock moves. It’s not clear any expert or system can
reliably predict individual stocks, at least over the long
term, or even the direction of financial markets. What
Renaissance does is try to anticipate stock moves relative
to other stocks, to an index, to a factor model, and to an
industry.
During his time helping to run the Medallion fund,
Elwyn Berlekamp came to view the narratives that most
investors latch on to to explain price moves as quaint,
even dangerous, because they breed misplaced
confidence that an investment can be adequately
understood and its futures divined. If it was up to
Berlekamp, stocks would have numbers attached to
them, not names.
“I don’t deny that earnings reports and other
business news surely move markets,” Berlekamp says.
“The problem is that so many investors focus so much on
these types of news that nearly all of their results cluster
very near their average.”

=
Days after Rebekah Mercer had David Magerman tossed
from the poker-night festivities at New York’s St. Regis
hotel, Renaissance fired the computer scientist, ending
any chance of a rapprochement between the warring
sides.
Magerman filed two lawsuits—a federal civil rights
claim against Robert Mercer and a wrongful termination

suit against Renaissance and Mercer. In both cases he
alleged that Mercer had him terminated from
Renaissance for “engaging in protected activity.”
“Mercer’s conduct is an outrageous attempt to deny
Magerman his constitutional and federal statutory
rights,” stated the ten-page complaint filed in federal
court in Philadelphia.
Magerman acknowledged that Renaissance’s
employee handbook prohibited him from publicly
disparaging the firm or its employees, but he said he had
obtained approval from at least one Renaissance
executive before sharing his concerns with the Wall
Street Journal earlier that year.
Magerman nursed hurt feelings. It still bothered him
that his old workmates had given him the cold shoulder.
Slowly, both he and his former firm began moving
past their dispute, though. As unhappy as Magerman had
been about Mercer’s political activity, and as adamant as
he was about his right to speak out, he never had wanted
to anger Simons, Brown, or his other colleagues. Some
days, Magerman even missed being close to Mercer.
“I worked for Renaissance for over twenty years,
they’re the one place I ever worked in my professional
life,” he told a reporter. “I had an obligation to inform
the public. . . . And that was the end of it, as far as I’m
concerned, except that I got suspended and fired.”14
In 2018, after months of negotiations, the two sides
reached an amicable settlement, with Magerman exiting
Renaissance with the right to invest in Medallion, like
other retirees. Soon, Magerman, now fifty years old,
adopted a new cause: combating powerful social media
companies. He gave nearly half a million dollars to a
coalition lobbying to break up Facebook and accepted a
senior position at a Philadelphia venture-capital firm to
work with fledgling data-related companies.

“I feel very good about where I am now, mentally and
personally,” he said late in 2018. “I wouldn’t quite go as
far to say there’s no hard feelings. But, you know, I’ve
definitely moved on.”15

=
After Mercer stepped down as Renaissance’s co–chief
executive officer in November 2017, staffers were
skeptical much would change at the company. Mercer
was still employed at Renaissance, and he continued to
be within earshot of Brown. Surely he’d go on reining in
Brown’s impulses, these employees said. Unlike other
researchers, Mercer reported directly to Brown, a sign of
his continued prominence. How much different were
things really going to be?
Almost immediately after announcing he was
stepping down, however, Mercer assumed a less
prominent role at the firm. He didn’t participate in
senior meetings and seemed out of the loop. The shift
sparked nervousness among employees who worried that
Brown would rush into ill-advised decisions without
Mercer to help guide him. Staffers feared the change
would hurt Renaissance’s returns at a time more
investment firms were rushing into quant trading,
resulting in more potential competition.
Brown seemed to sense the dangers. He responded
by tweaking his management style. Brown still kept the
same manic pace, sleeping in the Murphy bed in his
office most weekday nights. But he began leaning on
other senior staffers, asking for input from a mixed
group of colleagues. The shift steadied the firm and
helped Medallion end 2018 with a flourish, scoring gains
of about 45 percent that year, besting the performance of
almost every investment firm in a year the S&P 500
dropped over 6 percent, its worst performance since
2008. Renaissance’s three funds open for investors, the

Renaissance Institutional Equities Fund, the
Renaissance Institutional Diversified Alpha Fund, and
the Renaissance Institutional Diversified Global Equity
Fund, all topped the market, as well. Money poured into
the three funds, and Renaissance’s overall assets surged
past $60 billion, making it one of the largest hedge-fund
firms in the world.
“I think everything is under control,” Simons said
late in 2018. “As long as you keep making money for
investors, they’re generally pretty happy.”16

=
In the spring of 2018, Simons celebrated his eightieth
birthday. His family’s foundation marked the occasion
with a series of lectures focused on Simons’s
contributions to the field of physics. Academics and
others toasted Simons at a nearby hotel. A month later,
he hosted family and friends on his ship, the
Archimedes, for a nighttime cruise around Manhattan.
A distinct stoop in Simons’s shoulders accented his
advancing age, but he was razor-sharp, asking probing
questions and supplying humorous quips throughout the
festivities.
“I promise not to turn eighty again,” he joked to the
crowd.
Simons seemed to have arrived at a comfortable
landing spot in his life. He had pushed Mercer out of the
top job at Renaissance, relieving pressure, and the
company was thriving with Brown at the helm. Even the
Magerman imbroglio seemed in the rearview mirror.
Simons still felt pressures, though. Important life
goals remained unmet and it didn’t take a PhD in
mathematics to understand he likely didn’t have a huge
amount of time to accomplish them. Simons maintained
a daily routine that seemed aimed at improving his

chances of satisfying his remaining ambitions. Most
mornings, Simons woke around 6:30 a.m. and headed to
Central Park to walk several miles and exercise with a
trainer. On daylong hikes organized by his foundation,
Simons usually led the way, leaving young staffers
huffing and puffing behind him. Simons even switched to
slightly healthier electronic cigarettes, at least during
some meetings, his beloved Merits tucked deep into a
breast pocket.
Simons continued to check in with Brown and other
Renaissance executives, chairing meetings of the firm’s
board of directors. Once in a long while, he suggested an
idea to improve the operation. Simons’s focus was
elsewhere, however. That year, he spent $20 million
backing various Democratic political candidates, helping
the party regain control of the House of Representatives.
The Simons Foundation, with an annual budget of
$450 million, had emerged as the nation’s second-largest
private funder of research in basic science. Math for
America, the organization Simons helped found,
provided annual stipends of $15,000 to over one
thousand top math and science teachers in New York
City. It also hosted hundreds of annual seminars and
workshops, creating a community of skilled and
enthusiastic teachers. There were signs the initiative was
helping public schools retain the kinds of teachers who
previously had bolted for private industry.
One can see contradictions, even hypocrisies, in
some of Simons’s life decisions. Renaissance spent years
legally converting short-term gains into long-term
profits, saving its executives billions of dollars in taxes,
even as Simons decried a lack of spending by the
government on basic education in science, mathematics,
and other areas. Some strident critics, including author
and activist Naomi Klein, have questioned the growing
influence of society’s “benevolent billionaires,” who
sometimes single-handedly allocate resources and

determine priorities in the nonprofit world at a time of
stretched government budgets. Simons also can be
criticized for hiring waves of top scientists and
mathematicians for his hedge fund, even while lamenting
about the talent that private industry siphoned from the
public sphere and how many schools are unable to retain
top teachers.
Simons hasn’t poured his billions into vanity
projects, however. He dedicated cash and creativity to
efforts that may benefit millions. There are convincing
signs his charitable investments could lead to real
change, maybe even breakthroughs, perhaps during his
lifetime. Simons could be remembered for what he did
with his fortune, as well as how he made it.

EPILOGUE

J secrets and tackling challenges. Early in life, he

im Simons dedicated much of his life to uncovering

focused on mathematics problems and enemy codes.
Later, it was hidden patterns in financial markets.
Approaching his eighty-first birthday in the spring of
2019, Simons was consumed with two new difficulties,
likely the most imposing of his life: understanding and
curing autism, and discovering the origins of the
universe and life itself.
True breakthroughs in autism research hadn’t been
achieved and time was ticking by. Six years earlier, the
Simons Foundation had hired Louis Reichardt, a
professor of physiology and neuroscience who was the
first American to climb both Mount Everest and K2.
Simons handed Reichardt an even more daunting
challenge: improve the lives of those with autism.
The foundation helped establish a repository of
genetic samples from 2,800 families with at least one
child on the autism spectrum, accelerating the
development of animal models, a step toward potential
human treatments. By the spring of 2019, Simons’s
researchers had succeeded in gaining a deeper
understanding of how the autistic brain works and were
closing in on drugs with the potential to help those
battling the condition. A trial drew closer to test a drug
that might help as many as 20 percent of those suffering
from the disorder.
“It will be the first drug to have some effect on some
people,” Simons said. “I think we have a better than even
chance of success.”

Simons was just as hopeful about making headway
on a set of existential challenges that have confounded
humankind from its earliest moments. In 2014, Simons
recruited Princeton University astrophysicist David
Spergel, who is known for groundbreaking work
measuring the age and composition of the universe.
Simons tasked Spergel with answering the eternal
question of how the universe began. Oh, and please try to
do it in a few years, while I’m still around, Simons said.
Simons helped fund a $75 million effort to build an
enormous observatory with an array of ultrapowerful
telescopes in Chile’s Atacama Desert, a plateau 17,000
feet above sea level featuring especially clear, dry skies.
It’s an ideal spot to measure cosmic microwave radiation
and get a good look into creation’s earliest moments. The
project, led by a group of eight scientists including
Spergel and Brian Keating—an astrophysicist who directs
the Simons Observatory and happens to be the son of
Simons’s early partner, James Ax—is expected to be
completed by 2022. Among other things, the observatory
will search for distant evidence of the Big Bang, the
theorized event in which the universe came into
existence.1
Many scientists assume the universe instantaneously
expanded after creation, something they call cosmic
inflation. That event likely produced gravitational waves
and twisted light, or what Keating calls “the fingerprint
of the Big Bang.” Scientists have spent years searching
for evidence of this phenomenon, each effort meeting
crushing defeat, with decades of close calls but ultimate
futility. The Simons Observatory represents one of the
best chances yet of discovering these faint echoes of the
pangs of the universe’s birth, providing potential
evidence that the universe had a beginning.
“Jim is pushing to get answers soon,” Spergel says.
Simons himself expresses skepticism about the Big
Bang theory and whether his giant telescope will meet its

goal and produce evidence of cosmic inflation.
Subscribing to a view that time never had a starting
point, Simons simultaneously supports work by Paul
Steinhardt, the leading proponent of the noninflationary,
bouncing model, an opposing theory to the Big Bang.
“It’s always been aesthetically pleasing to me to think
time has gone on forever,” Simons says.
Sounding much like a hedge-fund trader, Simons
figures he’ll be a winner no matter what the different
teams discover. If his instincts are proven accurate and
inflation isn’t found, Simons will feel vindicated and
scientists like Steinhardt will pick up the torch. If the
Spergel-Keating group finds evidence backing the Big
Bang theory, “We win a Nobel and we’re all dancing in
the streets,” Simons says.
He remains just as eager for answers to other
questions that have flummoxed civilization for ages. His
foundation supported scientific collaborations aimed at
gaining an understanding of how life began, what early
life was like, and whether there might be life elsewhere in
our solar system or on planets outside our solar system.
“All religions have covered the topic and I’ve always
been curious,” he says. “I feel we’re getting closer to
finding out.”

=
On a brisk day in mid-March 2019, Simons and his wife
flew on their Gulfstream jet to an airport outside Boston.
There, they were met and driven to the Cambridge,
Massachusetts, campus of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Simons’s alma mater, where he was
scheduled to deliver a lecture. Wearing a tweed sports
jacket, tan khakis, a crisp blue shirt, and loafers, with no
socks, Simons addressed hundreds of students,
academics, and local businesspeople, reflecting on his
career, and the post-election turbulence at Renaissance.

Answering a question about why he didn’t stop Bob
Mercer’s political activities, Simons said, “I think he’s a
little crazy,” to a smattering of cheers. “But he’s
extremely bright. I couldn’t fire him because of his
political beliefs.”
Asked which professional investors students should
turn to for guidance, Simons struggled for an answer, a
quant still skeptical investors can forecast markets.
Finally, he mentioned his neighbor in Manhattan, hedgefund manager George Soros.
“I suppose he’s worth listening to,” Simons said,
“though he sure talks a lot.”
Simons shared a few life lessons with the school’s
audience: “Work with the smartest people you can,
hopefully smarter than you . . . be persistent, don’t give
up easily.
“Be guided by beauty . . . it can be the way a company
runs, or the way an experiment comes out, or the way a
theorem comes out, but there’s a sense of beauty when
something is working well, almost an aesthetic to it.”
Simons discussed his most recent passions, including
his efforts to understand the universe’s creation and
mankind’s origins.
“It’s entirely possible we’re alone,” he said, arguing
that intelligent life might solely exist on planet Earth,
thanks to a confluence of favorable factors likely not
found elsewhere.
For a brief moment, Simons looked at Marilyn,
sitting in the audience’s front row next to their grandson,
a graduate student at Harvard.
“We’ve had a lot of luck,” he said.
After an ovation from the audience, Simons extended
a modest wave. Walking slowly, he made his way out of
the hall, his family close behind.

Simons as a student.

Simons (left) setting out for Buenos Aires with his friends.

Simons (left) with Lee Neuwirth and Jack Ferguson, co-workers at
the IDA.

Simons was known among his friends
for his humor—and a passing
resemblance to Humphrey Bogart.

Renaissance’s original offices, near a women’s clothing boutique, a pizza
restaurant, and the Stony Brook train station.

Lenny Baum became a devoted Go player despite his deteriorating eyesight.

James Ax was brilliant, handsome—
and frequently angry.

Later in life, Ax moved to San Diego.

Elwyn Berlekamp helped Simons during a crucial period.

Bob Mercer (left) and Peter Brown were
responsible for Renaissance’s key
breakthroughs.
COURTESY OF WALL STREET JOURNAL
AND JENNY STRASBURG

Bob and Rebekah Mercer played active roles
in aiding Donald Trump’s presidential quest.

Simons and his wife, Marilyn, with acclaimed academics
Shiing-Shen Chern (seated) and Chen Ning Yang.

Simons lecturing about mathematics.

Simons with his favorite lemur at a Stony Brook event.

Jim and Marilyn Simons.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book was a passion project. For over two years, I
had the privilege of spending countless hours with
innovative and often eccentric mathematicians,
scientists, code breakers, and quant pioneers in the
United States and abroad.
It was also among the most imposing challenges of
my career. In high school, I never got past pre-calculus.
In college, I discussed mathematical concepts, but
applying them was another matter entirely. The next
algorithm I create will be my first. Without the support,
encouragement, and advice of practitioners in the field,
groundbreaking academics, and selfless others, this book
wouldn’t be in your hands.
Hal Lux was my rock—a font of sage advice and
valuable perspective. I also relied upon Aaron Brown,
Andrew Sterge, Richard Dewey, Rasheed Sabar, and
Dario Villani. I’m truly grateful for your intelligence,
expertise, and guidance.
Nick Patterson, Greg Hullender, Sandor Straus,
Elwyn Berlekamp, Robert Frey, Stephen Robert, David
Dwyer, Howard Morgan, and many other Renaissance
veterans provided important insights about various
periods of the firm’s history. Raimo Bakus, Richard
Stern, Ernest Chan, Philip Resnik, and Paul Cohen
shared their own experiences at IBM. Vickie Barone was
my math tutor. Michael Pomada, Brian Keating, and
Sam Enriquez were kind enough to read my manuscript
and contribute helpful comments.
Lee Neuwirth, Irwin Kra, Robert Bryant, Leonard
Charlap, Simon Kochen, Lloyd Welch, David Eisenbud,

Jeff Cheeger, Dennis Sullivan, John Lott, Cumrun Vafa,
and Phillip Griffiths answered endless questions with
uncommon patience and wisdom. I also appreciate the
assistance of Stefi Baum, Greg Hayt, Yuri Gabovich,
John J. Smith, David Spergel, Rishi Narang, and Sharon
Bertsch McGrayne.
My publisher, Adrian Zackheim, and my editor,
Merry Sun, provided unwavering support, boundless
enthusiasm, and savvy judgment. I consider myself lucky
to have them in my corner. Jacob Urban was an
indefatigable and gifted research assistant, and
Anastassia Gliadkovskaya helped in many ways down the
stretch, as did Nina Rodriguez-Marty.
I’m grateful for the support of friends, colleagues,
and family members, including Ezra Zuckerman Sivan,
Shara Shetrit, Harold Mark Simansky, Adam Brauer, Ari
Moses, Joshua Marcus, Stu Schrader, Marc Tobin, Eric
Landy, Kirsten Grind, and Jenny Strasburg. Enormous
thanks go to Moshe and Renee Glick, who always have
my back—on and off the softball field. I appreciate the
support of AABJD’s Sunday sluggers. Tova and Aviva
shared love and support. Jerry, Alisha, Hannah, and
Aiden Blugrind, David and Shari Cherna, and Douglas
and Elaine Eisenberg all encouraged my efforts while
feeding both my stomach and spirits. Avigaiyil
Goldscheider somehow kept me going and put a smile on
my face at three a.m.
Gio Urshela, DJ LeMahieu, and Aaron Judge
entertained me in the early evening. Justin Vernon,
Rhye, Randy Crawford, Donny Hathaway, Natalie
Merchant, Miles Davis, and Franz Schubert calmed and
comforted me through the night.
I’d like to thank the Wall Street Journal’s managing
editor, Matt Murray, and Charles Forelle, the editor of
the paper’s Business and Finance section, for blessing
this project.

Growing up, I didn’t particularly enjoy English class.
Diagramming sentences left me miserable and a highschool teacher criticized me for writing too many papers
about the Holocaust, dousing my enthusiasm for her
class. Most of what I know about writing comes from
reading—books from the Providence Public Library,
clever critiques of my work from my late father, Alan
Zuckerman, and thought-provoking or entertaining
articles cut out and shared by my mother, Roberta
Zuckerman. My parents’ love and lessons still guide me.
Last but in no way least, my wife, Michelle, played a
crucial role making this book a reality. As I struggled to
understand hidden Markov models and explain
stochastic differential equations, she soothed, cheered,
and encouraged me. I appreciate you more each day. My
book is dedicated to my sons, Gabriel Benjamin and
Elijah Shane. Even Jim Simons couldn’t have developed
a model capable of predicting the happiness you’ve given
me.

APPENDIX 1

Net Management Performance Returns Size
Medallion
Returns
Fee*
Fee
Before of Trading Profits*
Fees Fund
1988 9.0%

5%

20%

16.3%

$20
million

$3 million

1989 -4.0%

5%

20%

1.0%

$20
million

$0

1990 55.0%

5%

20%

77.8%

$30
million

$23 million

1991 39.4%

5%

20%

54.3%

$42
million

$23 million

1992 33.6%

5%

20%

47.0%

$74
million

$35 million

1993 39.1%

5%

20%

53.9%

$122
million

$66 million

1994 70.7%

5%

20%

93.4%

$276
million

$258 million

1995 38.3%

5%

20%

52.9%

$462
million

$244 million

1996 31.5%

5%

20%

44.4%

$637
million

$283 million

1997 21.2%

5%

20%

31.5%

$829
million

$261 million

Net Management Performance Returns Size
Medallion
Returns
Fee*
Fee
Before of Trading Profits*
Fees Fund
1998 41.7%

5%

20%

57.1%

$1.1
billion

$628 million

1999 24.5%

5%

20%

35.6% $1.54
billion

$549 million

2000 98.5%

5%

20%

128.1% $1.9
billion

$2,434 million

2001 33.0%

5%

36%

56.6%

$3.8
billion

$2,149 million

2002 25.8%

5%

44%

51.1% $5.24
billion

$2.676 billion

2003 21.9%

5%

44%

44.1% $5.09
billion

$2.245 billion

2004 24.9%

5%

44%

49.5%

$5.2
billion

$2.572 billion

2005 29.5%

5%

44%

57.7%

$5.2
billion

$2.999 billion

2006 44.3%

5%

44%

84.1%

$5.2
billion

$4.374 billion

2007 73.7%

5%

44%

136.6% $5.2
billion

$7.104 billion

2008 82.4%

5%

44%

152.1% $5.2
billion

$7.911 billion

2009 39.0%

5%

44%

74.6%

$5.2
billion

$3.881 billion

2010 29.4%

5%

44%

57.5%

$10
billion

$5.750 billion

Net Management Performance Returns Size
Medallion
Returns
Fee*
Fee
Before of Trading Profits*
Fees Fund
2011 37.0%

5%

44%

71.1%

$10
billion

$7.107 billion

2012 29.0%

5%

44%

56.8%

$10
billion

$5.679 billion

2013 46.9%

5%

44%

88.8%

$10
billion

$8.875 billion

2014 39.2%

5%

44%

75.0%

$9.5
billion

$7.125 billion

2015 36.0%

5%

44%

69.3%

$9.5
billion

$6.582 billion

2016 35.6%

5%

44%

68.6%

$9.5
billion

$6.514 billion

2017 45.0%

5%

44%

85.4%

$10
billion

$8.536 billion

2018 40.0%

5%

44%

76.4%

$10
billion

$7.643 billion

39.1%
average
net
returns

66.1%
average
returns
before
fees

$104,530,000,000
total trading
profits

Average Annual Returns
66.1% gross
39.1% net
The above profits of $104.5 billion represent those of the Medallion fund.
Renaissance also profits from three hedge funds available to outside
investors, which managed approximately $55 billion as of April 30, 2019.
(Source: Medallion annual reports; investors)

APPENDIX 2

Returns Comparison
Investor

Key Fund/Vehicle

Period

Jim Simons

Medallion Fund

1988–2018

39.1%

George Soros Quantum Fund

1969–2000

32%*

Steven Cohen SAC

1992–2003

30%

Peter Lynch

1977–1990

29%

Magellan Fund

Warren Buffett Berkshire Hathaway 1965–2018
Ray Dalio

Pure Alpha

1991–2018

Annualized Returns*

20.5%*
12%

(Source: For Simons, Dalio, Cohen, Soros: reporting; for Buffett: Berkshire
Hathaway annual report; for Lynch: Fidelity Investments.)

NOTES

Introduction
1. “Seed Interview: James Simons,” Seed, September 19, 2006.
2. Gregory Zuckerman, Rachel Levy, Nick Timiraos, and Gunjan Banerji, “Behind the Market Swoon: The Herdlike
Behavior of Computerized Trading,” Wall Street Journal, December 25, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/behindthe-market-swoon-the-herdlike-behavior-of-computerized-trading-11545785641.
Chapter One
1. D. T. Max, “Jim Simons, the Numbers King,” New Yorker, December 11, 2017,
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/12/18/jim-simons-the-numbers-king.
2. James Simons, “Dr. James Simons, S. Donald Sussman Fellowship Award Fireside Chat Series. Chat 2,” interview by
Andrew Lo, March 6, 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srbQzrtfEvY&t=4s.
Chapter Two
1. James Simons, “Mathematics, Common Sense, and Good Luck” (lecture, American Mathematical Society Einstein
Public Lecture in Mathematics, San Francisco, CA, October 30, 2014), https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=Tj1NyJHLvWA.
2. Lee Neuwirth, Nothing Personal: The Vietnam War in Princeton 1965–1975 (Charleston, SC: BookSurge, 2009).
3. Paul Vitello, “John S. Toll Dies at 87; Led Stony Brook University,” New York Times, July 18, 2011,
https://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/19/nyregion/john-s-toll-dies-at-87-led-stony-brook-university.html.
4. James Simons, “Simons Foundation Chair Jim Simons on His Career in Mathematics,” interview by Jeff Cheeger,
Simons Foundation, September 28, 2012, https://www.simonsfoundation.org/2012/09/28/simons-foundation-chairjim-simons-on-his-career-in-mathematics.
5. Simons, “On His Career in Mathematics.”
Chapter Three
1. Simons, “Mathematics, Common Sense, and Good Luck.”
2. William Byers, How Mathematicians Think: Using Ambiguity, Contradiction, and Paradox to Create Mathematics
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007).
3. Private papers from Lenny Baum, provided by his family.
4. Richard Teitelbaum, “The Code Breaker,” Bloomberg Markets, January 2008.
5. James Simons, “Jim Simons Speech on Leonard E. Baum” (speech, Leonard E. Baum Memorial, Princeton, NJ, August
15, 2017), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zN0ah7moPlQ.
6. Simons, “On His Career in Mathematics.”
7. Simons, “Jim Simons Speech on Leonard E. Baum.”
Chapter Four
1. Byers, How Mathematicians Think.
Chapter Five
1. James R. Hagerty and Gregory Zuckerman, “Math Wizard Elwyn Berlekamp Helped Bring Sharp Images from Outer
Space,” Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/math-wizard-elwyn-berlekamp-helped-bringsharp-images-from-outer-space-11556735303.
2. Brian Keating, Losing the Nobel Prize: A Story of Cosmology, Ambition, and the Perils of Science’s Highest Honor
(New York: W. W. Norton, 2018).
Chapter Six
1. James B. Stewart, Den of Thieves (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991).
Chapter Seven
1. Geoffrey Poitras, The Early History of Financial Economics, 1478–1776: From Commercial Arithmetic to Life
Annuities and Joint Stocks (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2000).
2. Mark Putrino, “Gann and Gann Analysis,” Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities, September 2017.
3. Brian Stelter, “Gerald Tsai, Innovative Investor, Dies at 79,” New York Times, July 11, 2008,
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/11/business/11tsai.html; John Brooks, The Go-Go Years: The Drama and
Crashing Finale of Wall Street’s Bullish 60s (New York: Weybright and Talley, 1973).
4. Andrew W. Lo and Jasmina Hasanhodzic, The Evolution of Technical Analysis: Financial Prediction from Babylonian
Tablets to Bloomberg Terminals (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010).

5. Douglas Bauer, “Prince of the Pit,” New York Times, April 25, 1976,
https://www.nytimes.com/1976/04/25/archives/prince-of-the-pit-richard-dennis-knows-how-to-keep-his-head-atthe.html.
6. Emanuel Derman, My Life as a Quant: Reflections on Physics and Finance (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2004).
7. Edward O. Thorp, A Man for All Markets: From Las Vegas to Wall Street, How I Beat the Dealer and the Market
(New York: Random House, 2017).
8. Scott Patterson, The Quants: How a New Breed of Math Whizzes Conquered Wall Street and Nearly Destroyed It
(New York: Crown Business, 2010).
9. Patterson, The Quants.
10. Michelle Celarier, “How a Misfit Group of Computer Geeks and English Majors Transformed Wall Street,” New York,
January 18, 2018, http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/01/d-e-shaw-the-first-great-quant-hedge-fund.html.
11. Hal Lux, “Secretive D. E. Shaw & Co. Opens Doors for Customers’ Business,” Investment Dealers’ Digest, November
15, 1993.
12. G. Bruce Knecht, “Wall Street Whiz Finds Niche Selling Books on the Internet,” Wall Street Journal, May 16, 1996,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB832204437381952500.
Chapter Eight
1. Ingfei Chen, “A Cryptologist Takes a Crack at Deciphering DNA’s Deep Secrets,” New York Times, December 12, 2006,
https://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/12/science/12prof.html.
2. John F. Greer Jr., “Simons Doesn’t Say,” Financial World, October 21, 1996.
Chapter Nine
1. Peter Lynch, “Pros: Peter Lynch,” interview with Frontline, PBS, May 1996,
www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/betting/pros/lynch.html; and Peter Lynch with John Rothchild, One Up on
Wall Street (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000).
2. Sebastian Mallaby, More Money Than God: Hedge Funds and the Making of a New Elite (New York: Penguin Press,
2010).
3. Michael Coleman, “Influential Conservative Is Sandia, UNM Grad,” Albuquerque Journal, November 5, 2017,
https://www.abqjournal.com/1088165/influential-conservative-is-sandia-unm-grad-robert-mercer-trump-fundraiserbreitbart-investor-has-nm-roots.html.
4. Robert Mercer, “A Computational Life” (speech, Association for Computational Linguistics Lifetime Achievement
Award, Baltimore, Maryland, June 25, 2014), http://techtalks.tv/talks/closing-session/60532.
5. Stephen Miller, “Co-Inventor of Money-Market Account Helped Serve Small Investors’ Interest,” Wall Street Journal,
August 16, 2008, https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB121884007790345601.
6. Feng-Hsiung Hsu, Behind Deep Blue: Building the Computer That Defeated the World Chess Champion (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002).
Chapter Ten
1. Peter Brown and Robert Mercer, “Oh, Yes, Everything’s Right on Schedule, Fred” (lecture, Twenty Years of Bitext
Workshop, Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing Conference, Seattle, Washington, October 2013),
http://cs.jhu.edu/~post/bitext.
Chapter Eleven
1. Hal Lux, “The Secret World of Jim Simons,” Institutional Investor, November 1, 2000,
https://www.institutionalinvestor.com/article/b151340bp779jn/the-secret-world-of-jim-simons.
2. Robert Mercer interviewed by Sharon McGrayne for her book, The Theory Would Not Die: How Bayes’ Rule Cracked
the Enigma Code, Hunted Down Russian Submarines, and Emerged Triumphant from Two Centuries of Controversy
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011).
3. Brown and Mercer, “Oh, Yes, Everything’s Right on Schedule, Fred.”
4. Jason Zweig, “Data Mining Isn’t a Good Bet for Stock-Market Predictions,” Wall Street Journal, August 8, 2009,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124967937642715417.
5. Lux, “The Secret World of Jim Simons.”
6. Robert Lipsyte, “Five Years Later, A Female Kicker’s Memorable Victory,” New York Times, October 19, 2000,
https://www.nytimes.com/2000/10/19/sports/colleges-five-years-later-a-female-kicker-s-memorable-victory.html.
7. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital Management (New York: Random
House, 2000).
8. Suzanne Woolley, “Failed Wizards of Wall Street,” BusinessWeek, September 21, 1998,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/1998-09-20/failed-wizards-of-wall-street.
9. Timothy L. O’Brien, “Shaw, Self-Styled Cautious Operator, Reveals It Has a Big Appetite for Risk,” New York Times,
October 15, 1998, https://www.nytimes.com/1998/10/15/business/shaw-self-styled-cautious-operator-reveals-it-hasa-big-appetite-for-risk.html.
10. Abuse of Structured Financial Products: Misusing Basket Options to Avoid Taxes and Leverage Limits: Hearings
before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs, 113th Congress (2014) (statement of Peter Brown, Chief Executive Officer, Renaissance Technologies),
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-113shrg89882/pdf/CHRG-113shrg89882.pdf.
Chapter Twelve
1. McGrayne, The Theory That Would Not Die: How Bayes’ Rule Cracked the Enigma Code, Hunted Down Russian
Submarines, and Emerged Triumphant from Two Centuries of Controversy.

2. Lux, “The Secret World of Jim Simons.”
3. Abuse of Structured Financial Products (statement of Peter Brown).
4. Katherine Burton, “Inside a Moneymaking Machine Like No Other,” Bloomberg, November 21, 2016,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-21/how-renaissance-s-medallion-fund-became-finance-sblackest-box.
5. George Gilder, Life after Google: The Fall of Big Data and the Rise of the Blockchain Economy (Washington, DC:
Regnery Gateway, 2018).
6. Simon Van Zuylen-Wood, “The Controversial David Magerman,” Philadelphia Magazine, September 13, 2013,
https://www.phillymag.com/news/2013/09/13/controversial-david-magerman.
7. Scott Patterson and Jenny Strasburg, “Pioneering Fund Stages Second Act,” Wall Street Journal, March 16, 2010,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703494404575082000779302566.
8. Zachary Mider, “What Kind of Man Spends Millions to Elect Ted Cruz?” Bloomberg, January 20, 2016,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2016-01-20/what-kind-of-man-spends-millions-to-elect-ted-cruz-.
9. William J. Broad, “Seeker, Doer, Giver, Ponderer,” New York Times, July 7, 2014,
https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/08/science/a-billionaire-mathematicians-life-of-ferocious-curiosity.html.
Chapter Thirteen
1. Christine Williamson, “Renaissance Believes Size Does Matter,” Pensions & Investments, November 27, 2006,
https://www.pionline.com/article/20061127/PRINT/611270744/renaissance-believes-size-does-matter.
2. Patterson, The Quants.
3. Gregory Zuckerman, The Greatest Trade Ever: The Behind-the-Scenes Story of How John Paulson Defied Wall Street
and Made Financial History (New York: Broadway Books, 2009).
4. Tae Kim, “Billionaire David Einhorn Says the Key to Investing Success Is ‘Critical Thinking,’” CNBC, December 26,
2017, https://www.cnbc.com/2017/12/26/david-einhorn-says-the-key-to-investing-success-is-critical-thinking.html.
5. Susan Pulliam and Jenny Strasburg, “Simons Questioned by Investors,” Wall Street Journal, May 15, 2009,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124235370437022507.
Chapter Fourteen
1. Alice Walker, “Billionaire Mathematician Jim Simons Parks £75 million Super Yacht during Tour of Scotland,” Scottish
Sun, July 15, 2018, https://www.thescottishsun.co.uk/fabulous/2933653/jim-simons-super-yacht-billionairescotland-tour.
2. Simons, “On His Career in Mathematics.”
3. Van Zuylen-Wood, “The Controversial David Magerman.”
4. Ryan Avent, “If It Works, Bet It,” Economist, June 14, 2010, https://www.economist.com/freeexchange/2010/06/14/if-it-works-bet-it.
5. James Simons, “My Life in Mathematics” (lecture, International Congress of Mathematics, Seoul, South Korea, August
13, 2014), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RP1ltutTN_4.
6. John Marzulli, “Hedge Fund Hotshot Robert Mercer Files Lawsuit over $2M Model Train, Accusing Builder of
Overcharge,” New York Daily News, March 31, 2009, https://www.nydailynews.com/news/hedge-fund-hotshotrobert-mercer-files-lawsuit-2m-model-train-accusing-builder-overcharge-article-1.368624.
7. Patterson and Strasburg, “Pioneering Fund Stages Second Act.”
8. Joshua Green, Devil’s Bargain: Steve Bannon, Donald Trump, and the Storming of the Presidency (New York:
Penguin Press, 2017).
9. Mider, “Ted Cruz?”
10. Juliet Chung, “Mega Merger: Six Apartments May Make One,” Wall Street Journal, April 27, 2010,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704446704575207193495569502.
11. Ben Smith, “Hedge Fund Figure Financed Mosque Campaign,” Politico, January 18, 2011,
https://www.politico.com/blogs/ben-smith/2011/01/hedge-fund-figure-financed-mosque-campaign-032525.
12. Vicky Ward, “The Blow-It-All-Up Billionaires,” Highline, March 17, 2017,
https://highline.huffingtonpost.com/articles/en/mercers.
13. Gregory Zuckerman, Keach Hagey, Scott Patterson, and Rebecca Ballhaus, “Meet the Mercers: A Quiet Tycoon and
His Daughter Become Power Brokers in Trump’s Washington,” Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2017,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/meet-the-mercers-a-quiet-tycoon-and-his-daughter-become-power-brokers-intrumps-washington-1483904047.
14. Carole Cadwalladr, “Revealed: How US Billionaire Helped to Back Brexit,” Guardian, February 25, 2017,
https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/feb/26/us-billionaire-mercer-helped-back-brexit.
15. Jane Mayer, “New Evidence Emerges of Steve Bannon and Cambridge Analytica’s Role in Brexit,” New Yorker,
November 17, 2018, https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/new-evidence-emerges-of-steve-bannon-andcambridge-analyticas-role-in-brexit.
16. Nigel Farage, “Farage: ‘Brexit Could Not Have Happened without Breitbart,’” interview by Alex Marlow, Turning Point
USA Student Action Summit, December 20, 2018, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W73L6L7howg.
17. Matea Gold, “The Rise of GOP Mega-donor Rebekah Mercer,” Washington Post, September 14, 2016,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/the-rise-of-gop-mega-donor-rebekah-mercer/2016/09/13/85ae3c3279bf-11e6-beac-57a4a412e93a_story.html.
18. Green, Devil’s Bargain.

19. Corey R. Lewandowski and David N. Bossie, Let Trump Be Trump: The Inside Story of His Rise to the Presidency
(New York: Center Street, 2017).
Chapter Fifteen
1. Jonathan Lemire and Julie Pace, “Trump Spent Saturday Night at a Lavish ‘Villains and Heroes’ Costume Party Hosted
by Some of His Biggest Donors,” Associated Press, December 3, 2016, https://www.businessinsider.com/trumpattends-mercer-lavish-villains-and-heroes-costume-party-2016-12.
2. Matea Gold, “The Mercers and Stephen Bannon: How a Populist Power Base Was Funded and Built,” Washington
Post, March 17, 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/mercer-bannon.
3. Jane Mayer, “The Reclusive Hedge-Fund Tycoon behind the Trump Presidency,” New Yorker, March 17, 2017,
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/03/27/the-reclusive-hedge-fund-tycoon-behind-the-trump-presidency.
4. Zuckerman et al., “Meet the Mercers.”
5. William Julius Wilson, “Hurting the Disadvantaged,” review of Civil Rights: Rhetoric or Reality? by Thomas Sowell,
New York Times, June 24, 1984, https://www.nytimes.com/1984/06/24/books/hurting-the-disadvantaged.html.
6. David M. Schwartz, “Robert Mercer’s North Shore Home Draws Tax Demonstrators,” Newsday, March 28, 2017,
https://www.newsday.com/long-island/politics/spin-cycle/protest-at-robert-mercer-s-li-home-1.13329816.
7. Gregory Zuckerman, “Renaissance Feud Spills Over to Hedge Fund Poker Night,” Wall Street Journal, April 28, 2017,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/renaissance-feud-spills-over-to-hedge-fund-poker-night-1493424763.
8. Jeremy W. Peters, “Milo Yiannopoulos Resigns from Breitbart News after Pedophilia Comments,” New York Times,
February 21, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/21/business/milo-yiannopoulos-resigns-from-breitbart-newsafter-pedophilia-comments.html.
9. Robin Pogrebin and Somini Sengupta, “A Science Denier at the Natural History Museum? Scientists Rebel,” New York
Times, January 25, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/25/climate/rebekah-mercer-natural-historymuseum.html.
10. Gregory Zuckerman, “Mercer Influence Wanes as Other Washington Donors Emerge,” Wall Street Journal,
November 4, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/mercer-influence-wanes-as-other-washington-donors-emerge1541350805.
11. Zuckerman, “Mercer Influence Wanes.”
Chapter Sixteen
1. “Morningstar Reports US Mutual Fund and ETF Fund Flows for April 2019,” PR Newswire, May 17, 2019,
https://finance.yahoo.com/news/morningstar-reports-u-mutual-fund-130000604.html.
2. Gregory Zuckerman, “Architect of Greatest Trade Ever Hit by Losses, Redemptions Postcrisis,” Wall Street Journal,
April 27, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/architect-of-greatest-trade-ever-hit-by-losses-redemptions-postcrisis1524837987.
3. Gregory Zuckerman, “‘This Is Unbelievable’: A Hedge Fund Star Dims, and Investors Flee,” Wall Street Journal, July
4, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/this-is-unbelievable-a-hedge-fund-star-dims-and-investors-flee-1530728254.
4. Gregory Zuckerman and Kirsten Grind, “Inside the Showdown Atop PIMCO, the World’s Biggest Bond Firm,” Wall
Street Journal, February 24, 2014, https://www.wsj.com/articles/inside-the-showdown-atop-pimco-the-worldsbiggest-bond-firm-1393298266.
5. George Budwell, “Why Geron Corporation’s Stock Is Charging Higher Today,” Motley Fool, August 28, 2018,
https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/08/28/why-geron-corporations-stock-is-charging-higher-to.aspx.
6. Data based on report by TABB Group.
7. Nathan Vardi, “Running the Numbers,” Forbes, April 30, 2019.
8. “The Four Vs of Big Data,” infographic, IBM Big Data & Analytics (website),
https://www.ibmbigdatahub.com/sites/default/files/infographic_file/4-Vs-of-big-data.jpg?
cm_mc_uid=16172304396014932905991&cm_mc_sid_50200000=1494235431&cm_mc_sid_52640000=149423543
1.
9. Bradley Hope, “Five Ways Quants Are Predicting the Future,” Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2015,
https://blogs.wsj.com/briefly/2015/04/01/5-ways-quants-are-predicting-the-future.
10. Richard Dewey, “Computer Models Won’t Beat the Stock Market Any Time Soon,” Bloomberg, May 21, 2019,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-05-21/computer-models-won-t-beat-the-stock-market-any-timesoon.
11. Aruna Viswanatha, Bradley Hope, and Jenny Strasburg, “‘Flash Crash’ Charges Filed,” Wall Street Journal, April 21,
2015, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-k-man-arrested-on-charges-tied-to-may-2010-flash-crash-1429636758.
12. Robin Wigglesworth, “Goldman Sachs’ Lessons from the ‘Quant Quake,’” Financial Times, September 3, 2017,
https://www.ft.com/content/fdfd5e78-0283-11e7-aa5b-6bb07f5c8e12.s
13. “Seed Interview: James Simons.”
14. Marcus Baram, “The Millionaire Critic Who Scared Facebook Now Wants to Help ‘Fix the Internet,’” Fast Company,
December 11, 2018, https://www.fastcompany.com/90279134/the-millionaire-critic-who-scared-facebook-wants-tohelp-fix-the-internet.
15. Baram, “The Millionaire Critic Who Scared Facebook.”
16. Richard Henderson, “Renaissance Founder Says Hedge Fund Has Overcome Trump Tension,” Financial Times,
March 15, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/7589277c-46d6-11e9-b168-96a37d002cd3.
Epilogue

1. Gary Robbins, “UCSD Gets $40 Million to Study Infancy of the Universe,” San Diego Union-Tribune, May 12, 2016,
https://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/science/sdut-ucsd-simons-telescopes-2016may12-story.html.

ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
INDEX
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided
will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that
location to find the corresponding reference on your e-reader.
Access Hollywood (TV show), 282
AccuWeather, 80
African Americans, 13–14, 232, 292–94
Alberghine, Carole, 57
Alberghine, Penny, 59–60, 62, 78
Albuquerque Journal, 170
Algebraic Coding Theory (Berlekamp), 93
Almgren, Frederick, Jr., 28
Alphabet, 272–73
alternative data, 311–12
“alt-right,” 278–79, 290
Amazon.com, 134
Ambrose, Warren, 15
America First Committee, 282
American Museum of Natural History, 303
anchoring, 152
Animal Farm (Orwell), xvi
anti-Semitism, 46, 185, 303
Apple Computer, 89, 166
AQR Capital Management, 256–57
arbitrage. See Statistical arbitrage
Archimedes (yacht), 267, 320
Armstrong, Neil, 170
Artin, Emil, 69
Asness, Clifford, 256–57
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 37
astrology, 121–22
autism, xviii, 268, 287, 323–24
Automated Proprietary Trading (APT), 131–32, 133
AWK, 233–34
Ax, Frances, 98
Ax, James, xi, 37, 68–69, 324
at Axcom Limited, 78–83
backgammon, 69, 76–77

background of, 68–69
at Berkeley, 68–69
Berlekamp and, 95–102
conspiracy theories of, 77–78, 99
at Cornell, 69, 70–71
death of, 103
focus on mathematics, 69–70
at Monemetrics, 51–52, 72–73
personality of, 68, 70, 71–72, 98–99
Simons and, 34, 68–69, 99–103, 107
at Stony Brook, 34, 71–72
trading models, 73, 74–75, 77–78, 81–86, 95–101, 107
Axcom Limited, 78–83
disbanding of, 118
trading models, 95–101, 107–18
Ax-Kochen theorem, 69, 70, 103
Bachelier, Louis, 128
backgammon, 69, 76–77
backtesting, 3
Bacon, Louis, 140
Baker House, 15–16
Baltimore City Fire and Police Employees’ Retirement System, 299–300
Bamberger, Gerry, 129–30
BankAmerica Corporation, 212
Bannon, Steve, 279, 280, 280n
break with Mercers, 304
at Breitbart, 278–79, 299–300, 301–2
midterm elections of 2018, 304
presidential election of 2016, xviii, 281–82, 284–85, 288–90, 293, 294–95
Barclays Bank, 225, 259
bars, 143–44
Barton, Elizabeth, 272
basket options, 225–27
Baum, Julia Lieberman, 46, 48, 50, 62–63, 65
Baum, Leonard “Lenny,” xi, 45–46, 63–66
background of, 46
currency trading, 28–29, 49–53, 54–60, 62–64, 73
death of, 66
at Harvard, 46
at IDA, 25, 28–29, 46–49, 81
at Monemetrics, 45, 49–60, 63–65
move to Bermuda, 64–65
rift with Simons, 63–65

trading debacle of 1984, 65, 66
Baum, Morris, 46
Baum, Stefi, 48, 62, 63
Baum–Welch algorithm, 47–48, 174, 179
Bayes, Thomas, 174
Bayesian probability, 148, 174
Beane, Billy, 308
Beat the Dealer (Thorp), 127, 163
Beautiful Mind, A (Nasar), 90
behavioral economics, 152, 153
Bell Laboratories, 91–92
Belopolsky, Alexander, 233, 238, 241, 242, 252–54
Bent, Bruce, 173
Berkeley Quantitative, 118
Berkshire Hathaway, 265, 309, 333
Berlekamp, Elwyn, xi
at Axcom, 94–97, 102–3, 105–18
background of, 87–90
at Bell Labs, 91–92
at Berkeley, 92–93, 95, 115, 118, 272
at Berkeley Quantitative, 118
death of, 118
at IDA, 93–94
Kelly formula and, 91–92, 96, 127
at MIT, 89–91
Simons and, 2–3, 4, 93–95, 109–10, 113–14, 116–18, 124
trading models and strategies, 2–3, 4, 95–98, 106–18, 317
Berlekamp, Jennifer Wilson, 92
Berlekamp, Waldo, 87–88
Berlin Wall, 164
Bermuda, 64–65, 254
Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities, 198
betting algorithm, 144, 167
Bezos, Jeffrey, 134
Bezos, MacKenzie, 134
Big Bang, 324–25
Big Bang Theory, The (TV show), 254
Big Bounce, 325
black box investing, 137
Black Monday (1987), 97, 126, 256
Boesky, Ivan, 106
Bolton, John, 305
Bombieri, Enrico, 28

bond trading, 53, 55
bonuses, 200–201
Bookstaber, Richard, 314–15
Bossie, David, 284, 285, 289
Botlo, Michael, 154–55
Box, George, 245
Bozell, Brent, 304
Breakfast Club, The (movie), 183
breakout signals, 83–84
Breck’s (Newton, MA), 9–10
Breitbart, Andrew, 278
Breitbart News, 278, 280–81, 289–90, 295, 299–300, 301–2
Brexit, xviii, 280–81
Bridgewater Associates, 310
British pound, 40, 52, 79, 165
Brookhaven National Laboratory, 154
Brown, Aaron, 171
Brown, Henry, 172–73
Brown, Margaret, 176, 179–80, 229
Brown, Peter, xi
background of, 172–73
education of, 187
at IBM, 5, 173–81, 187–88
Brown, Peter, at Renaissance
client presentations, 249–50, 251
equity stake, 201
financial crisis and, 257–61
Magerman and, 181–82, 191–95, 241, 294, 296, 297, 299, 318
management, 208–9, 230–31, 232–33, 237, 241–43, 254–55, 275, 289–90, 319, 320
Mercer and political blowback, 296, 297, 299, 319
recruitment of, 169, 179–80
statistical-arbitrage trading system, 187–91, 193–95, 197–99, 204, 205–8, 213–14, 223,
224–27, 229–32, 255
tech bubble, 215–17
Brown University, 103
Buffett, Warren, xvi, 96, 161, 265, 309
Bush, John Ellis “Jeb,” 279
C++, 155, 191–92
Caddell, Patrick, 279–80
Café (movie), 270
Calhoun, Anthony, 299–300
California Institute of Technology, 53–54
Cambridge Analytica, 279, 280–81, 303

Cambridge Junior College, 22
Candide (Voltaire), 230
candlestick pattern, 122
Carlson, Tucker, 285
Carmona, René, 40, 81–86, 96, 98–99
Carnegie Mellon University, 173, 178
Celanese Corporation, 19
“Characteristic Forms and Geometric Invariants” (Chern and Simons), 38
Charlap, Leonard, 33, 36, 71–72, 141
Cheeger, Jeff, 39
Chern, Shiing-Shen, 17–18, 38
Chern–Simons theory, 17–18, 38
chess, 50, 147, 178
Chevron, 79
Chhabra, Ashvin, 308
Chicago Board of Trade, 113–14, 125
Christie, Chris, 285
Chrysler, 251
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 208
Citadel Investment Group, 256, 310–11
Citigroup, 123
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, 277
City College of New York, 141
Civil Rights: Rhetoric or Reality? (Sowell), 293
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 292–93
Clayton, Jay, 290
climate change, 231, 275–76, 283, 291, 303
Clinton, Bill, 207–8, 212, 276
Clinton, Hillary, 276, 281, 287, 302
Coca-Cola, 129–30, 272
coding, 93–94, 171, 173–74, 178–79
cognitive biases, 152–53
Cohen, Steve, xvi, 333
Cold War, 23–24, 148
Cole Prize, 34, 70
Columbia University, 126, 129, 131, 137, 211, 268
combination effects, 144
combinatorial game theory, 93
Commodities Corporation, 140
commodities trading, 19–20, 39, 44, 94
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), 58
computer programming, 24, 170–71, 173–74, 178–79
Conrad, Joseph, 50–51

convergence trading, 209
convertible bonds, 33, 137
Conway, Kellyanne, xviii, 281–82, 284–85, 288–90, 293, 304–5
Cooper, Tim, 275–76
Cornell University, 34, 69, 70–71
cosmic inflation, 324–25
creationism, 232
credit default swaps, 263–64
Crohn’s disease, 68, 260
Cruz, Ted, 281
currency trading, 40, 45, 49–59, 79–80, 110–11, 113–14
Cusack, Joan, 277
Dalio, Ray, xvi, 310, 333
“data analysts,” 311–12
data cleansing, 3
“data hunters,” 311–12
data overfitting, 204–5
D. E. Shaw, 133–35, 138, 139, 145, 209, 211–12, 233
Deep Blue, 178
Deep Throat (movie), 178
DeFazio, Peter, 276
Defense, U.S. Department of, 24–25, 32
Déjà Vu, 272
Della Pietra, Stephen, 177, 191, 206
Della Pietra, Vincent, 177, 191, 206
Dennis, Richard, 125
Derman, Emanuel, 126
Deutsche Bank, 225, 259, 260
Dewey, Richard, 313
differential equations, 26–28, 81–83
differential geometry, 19, 20–21, 26–28
Doctor Who (TV show), 211
Dodd, David, 127
dot-com crash, 215–17, 257–58
dots and boxes, 88
Dow, Charles, 122
Dow Jones Industrial Average, 97, 122, 123, 126, 255–56, 314
Druckenmiller, Stanley, 124, 164–65
Dugard, Reggie, 77
Duke University, 207
dune bashing, 261–62
Dunkin’ Donuts, 162
Dunn & Hargitt, 75

Dwyer, David, 248–49, 259–60, 264–65
early 2000s recession, 215–17, 257–58
Eastman Kodak, 94
ectodermal dysplasia, 61
E. F. Hutton, 64
efficient market hypothesis, 111, 152, 179
Einhorn, David, 264, 309
Einstein, Albert, 27, 128
Elias, Peter, 90–91
email spam, 174
embeddings, 141
endowment effect, 152
Englander, Israel, 238, 252–54, 310
English, Chris, 298, 299
Enron, 226
Esquenazi, Edmundo, 17, 21, 38–39, 50
Euclidean Capital, 308
European Exchange Rate Mechanism, 165
European Union, 280–81
Evans, Robert, 128
Everything Must Go (movie), 270
Exxon, 132, 173
Facebook, 303–4, 318
facial dysplasia, 147
factor investing, 30, 132–33, 315
Farage, Nigel, 280–81
Farkas, Hershel, 34–35
Federalist Society, 290
Federal Reserve, 56–57, 59, 65, 151, 211
Fermat conjecture, 69–70
Ferrell, Will, 270
Fidelity Investments, 161–63
Fields Medal, 28
financial crisis of 2007–2008, 255–62, 263–64
financial engineering, 126
Financial Times, 229
First Amendment, 277
Fischbach, Gerald, 268
flash crash of 2010, 314
Food and Drug Administration, 206, 311
Fortran, 170
Fort Thomas Highlands High School, 88–89
fractals, 127

Franklin Electronic Publishers, 61
freediving, 239
Freedom Partners Action Fund, 278
Freifeld, Charlie, 38–39, 44, 67
Frey, Robert, 200, 240
at Kepler, 133, 157, 166–67, 180
Mercer and election of 2016, 302–3
at Morgan Stanley, 131, 132–33
statistical-arbitrage trading system, 131, 132–33, 157, 166–67, 186–90
Fried, Michael, 72
fundamental investing, 127–28, 161–63, 247, 310
game theory, 2, 88, 93
GAM Investments, 153–54
Gann, William D., 122–23
Gasthalter, Jonathan, 263
gender discrimination, 168, 168n, 176–77, 207
German deutsche marks, 52, 57–58, 110–11, 164–65
Geron Corporation, 310
ghosts, 111
gold, 3, 40, 57, 63–64, 116, 207
Goldman Sachs, 126, 133–34, 256
Goldsmith, Meredith, 176–77
Gone With the Wind (Mitchell), 88
Goodman, George, 124–25
Google, 48, 272–73
Gore, Al, 212
Graham, Benjamin, 127
Granade, Matthew, 312
Greenspan, Alan, 59
Griffin, Ken, 256, 310–11
Gross, Bill, 3, 163–64, 309
Grumman Aerospace Corporation, 56, 78
Gulfstream G450, 257, 267, 325
Hamburg, Margaret, 206
Hanes, 162
Harpel, Jim, 13–14, 283
Harrington, Dan, 297
Harvard University, 15, 17, 21–22, 23, 46–48, 173, 176, 185, 272
head and shoulders pattern, 123–24
Heritage at Trump Place, 278
Heritage Foundation, 278
Hewitt, Jennifer Love, 270
high-frequency trading, 107, 222–23, 271

Hitler, Adolph, 165, 282
holonomy, 20
Homma, Munehisa, 122
housing market, 224–25, 255, 261, 309
Hullender, Greg, 53–59, 74
human longevity, 276
IBM, 33, 37, 169, 171–79, 311
Icahn, Carl, 282
illegal immigrants, 290–91
information advantage, 105–6
information theory, 90–91
insider trading, 310
Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA), 23–26, 28–29, 30–32, 35, 46–49, 93–94
Institutional Investor, 218, 223
interest rates, 163–64, 224–25, 272–73
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 227
Iraq, invasion of Kuwait, 116, 117
Israel, 184–85, 262
iStar, 26
Japanese yen, 49–50, 52–53, 54–55, 65
Jean-Jacques, J. Dennis, 163
Jelinek, Fred, 173–74, 177
Jobs, Steve, xvii
Johnson, Lyndon, 32
Johnson, Woody, 281–82
Johnson & Johnson, 310
Jones, Paul Tudor, 96, 140, 217
JPMorgan Chase, 308
Juno, 212
Kahneman, Daniel, 152, 161
Kantor, Peter, 11
Kasparov, Garry, 178
Katok, Anatole, 236
Kaufman, Charles, 128
Keating, Barbara Ax, 34, 37, 69, 71, 78–79, 103
Keating, Brian, 34, 37–38, 71–72, 79, 103, 324
Keating, Kevin, 34, 37, 71–72, 79
Kelly, John Larry, Jr. (Kelly formula), 91–92, 96, 127
Kempe, Julia, 272
Kennedy, John F., 31, 78
Kepler Financial Management, 133–34, 157, 166–67
kernel methods, 84–86, 96
Kirtland Air Force Base, 170–71

Klein, Naomi, 321
Koch, Charles, 278
Koch, David, 278
Kochen, Simon, 69–70, 71, 103
Kononenko, Alexey, 236–37, 241–43, 262–63, 270–71
Kostant, Bertram, 18, 20
Kovner, Bruce, 140
Kurz, Christopher, 121–22
Kushner, Jared, 281, 292
Lackman, Abe, 286
Laufer, Henry, xi, 101
background of, 140–41
Long Island Sound estate of, 227–28
at Renaissance, 109, 141–44, 149–50, 201, 229–31, 233
at Stony Brook, 77, 78, 84–85, 141–42
trading models, 77, 107–18, 142–43, 149–50, 156, 168, 189, 197, 229–30, 253, 258
Laufer, Marsha Zlatin, 141–42
Law of Vibration, 123
Lawrence School, 13
Leave.EU, 280–81
L’eggs, 162
Lehman Brothers, 173, 264, 309
Leibler, Dick, 26, 30–31, 32
Leinweber, David, 204
Leo, Leonard, 290
Let’s Make a Deal (TV show), 211
leverage, 188
Lewinsky, Monica, 208
Lieberman, Louis, 46
Limroy, 50–51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 98, 346
linear regression, 83–84
liquidity, 229
Lo, Andrew, 123, 124
locals, 110
Loma Prieta earthquake of 1989, 107
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), 209–11, 212–13, 226, 256
Lord Jim, The (yacht), 60
loss aversion, 152
Lott, John R., Jr., 207
Lourie, Robert, 11, 228, 257
Lux, Hal, 218
Lynch, Carolyn, 162
Lynch, Peter, xvi, 3, 161–63

McCain, John, 304
McCarthy, David, 154
McCarthy, Eugene, 74
McGrayne, Sharon, 202
machine learning, 4–5, 47–48, 144, 205, 215, 315
McNulty, Bill, 295
Macrae, Kenny, 267
macro investors, 164
“macroscopic variables,” 29
Madoff, Bernard, 146n, 198
Magellan Fund, 161–63, 333
Magerman, David, xi
background of, 182–84
computer hacking of, 191–93, 213
confrontational behavior of, 235, 270
education of, 183–85
at IBM, 177, 181, 185, 191–92
Mercers and, 195, 213–14, 232, 277, 291–99, 318
at Penn, 270
philanthropic activity of, 270, 318
presidential election of 2016 and Trump, 290–94
Magerman, David, at Renaissance
Brown and, 181–82, 191–95, 241, 294, 296, 297, 299, 318
computer bug, 194–95, 213
departures, 262–63, 269–70
firing, 317–18
Kononenko and, 237, 241–43, 262–63, 270–71
lawsuit and financial settlement, 318–19
misgivings of, 269–70
recruitment of, 181–82, 186–87
return to, 270–71
Simons and, 181–82, 186–87, 234–35, 237, 296–99
tech bubble, 215–17
trading system, 186–87, 191–95, 213–17, 234–36
Magerman, Debra, 291, 292
Magerman, Melvin, 182–83, 184
Mahlmann, Karsten, 114
Malloy, Martin, 259
management fees, 115n, 248
Man AHL, 313
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 127
Man for All Markets, A (Thorp), 128
Manhattan Fund, 123

market neutral, 166–67, 211, 255
Markov chains, 46–48, 81
Markov model, xx, 29, 174
Markowitz, Harry, 30
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 9, 14–16, 17, 20–21, 89–91, 325–26
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, 236–37
Math for America, 269, 296–99, 321
Matrix, The (movie), 307
Mattone, Vinny, 210–11
Mayer, Jane, 280
Mayer, Jimmy, 15, 16–17, 21, 38–39, 50
Mazur, Barry, 15
Medallion Fund
basket options, 225–27
fees, 145–46, 235–36, 271, 315–16
financial crisis and, 257–61, 263–64
GAM Investments, 153–54
launch of, 98
move into stock investing, 157–58
returns, xvi, 140, 145–46, 151, 153, 156, 157, 215, 217–18, 223–24, 225, 247–48, 255, 271,
315–16, 319, 331–32
returns comparison, 333
Sharpe ratio, 218, 223–24, 245
size limit, 246–47
trading models, 107–9, 113, 138–40, 142–43, 156–57, 168, 197–205, 271–74
Media Research Center, 304
Mercer, Diana, 179, 186, 214, 228, 288
Mercer, Heather Sue, 207, 214, 228
Mercer, Jennifer “Jenji,” 179, 186, 228
Mercer, Rebekah, xi, 228
Bannon and Breitbart News, 278–83, 288–90, 294–95, 301–2
emergence as right-wing donor, 277–79, 301–2
Magerman and, 214, 291, 293, 298, 299
political blowback and, 301–2, 303–5
presidential election of 2016 and Trump, xviii, 279–86, 288–90, 294–95
at Renaissance, 214
Mercer, Robert, xi
background of, 169–70
education of, 169–70
emergence as right-wing donor, xviii, 276–86, 325–26
at IBM, 4–5, 169, 171–81, 187–88, 202
interest in computers, 170–71
at Kirtland Air Force Base, 170–71

libertarian views of, 171, 207–8, 232, 235, 275–77
presidential election of 2016 and Trump, xviii, 279–87, 291–95, 299–300, 302
Stony Brook Harbor estate (Owl’s Nest), 228, 275, 288–89, 295
Mercer, Robert, at Renaissance
client presentations, 251
as co-CEO, xviiin, 231, 290, 301
equity stake, 201
financial crisis and, 257–61
Magerman and, 195, 213–14, 232, 277, 291–99, 318
management, 230–31, 232–33, 237, 241–43, 254–55, 289–90
political blowback and, 291–305
recruitment of, 169, 179–80
resignation of, 301–2, 319
statistical-arbitrage trading system, 4–5, 187–91, 193–95, 197–99, 205–8, 213–14, 221–
22, 223, 229–32, 255, 272
tech bubble, 215–17
Mercer, Thomas, 169, 179
Mercer, Virginia, 169
Mercer Family Foundation, 276
Meriwether, John, 209–11, 212
Merrill Lynch, 19–20, 54, 96
Merton, Robert C., 209
Mexico–United States border wall, 290–91
Microsoft, 38, 59
Milken, Michael, 105–6, 129
Millennium Management, 238, 252–54
minimal varieties, 26–28, 38
“Minimal Varieties in Riemannian Manifolds” (Simons), 28
Mirochnikoff, Sylvain, 278
Mississippi, 13–14
Mnuchin, Steve, 282
Monemetrics
Ax at, 34, 51–52, 72–73
Baum at, 45, 49–60, 63–65
founding and naming of, 44–45
Hullender at, 54–59, 74
name change to Renaissance, 61. See also Renaissance Technologies Corporation
Straus at, 74–77
trading models, 54–60, 62–63
Money Game, The (Goodman), 124–25
Monty Hall problem, 211
More Guns, Less Crime (Lott Jr.), 207
Morgan, Howard, 56

Morgan Stanley, 129–33, 157, 166, 211, 256
Moscow State University, 236
moving averages, 73
Muller, Peter, 256, 299
multidimensional anomalies, 273
Murdoch, Rupert, xvii
Murphy, John, 96
Musk, Elon, xvii
mutual funds, 161–64, 172, 309–10
My Life as a Quant (Derman), 126
NASA, 93
Nasar, Sylvia, 90
Nasdaq’s dot-com crash, 215–17, 257–58
Nash, John, 89–90
National Museum of Mathematics, 262
National Rifle Association (NRA), 275
National Security Agency (NSA), 23–24, 31, 208
National Youth Science Camp, 170
Nepal, 239, 240
Neuwirth, Lee, 25, 26, 30–31, 46
Newman, Paul, 128
news flashes, 221–22
Newton, Isaac, 27
Newton High School, 13
New York City Fire Department, 168
New York Mercantile Exchange, 58
New York Stock Exchange, 211, 212
New York Times, 31–32, 76, 99, 126, 172, 281, 282, 293
Nick Simons Institute, 240
Nobel Prize, 33, 152, 209
noncompete agreements, 133, 201, 238, 241, 252–53
nondisclosure agreements, xv–xvi, 133, 201, 238, 241, 252–53
nonrandom trading effects, 143–44
Norris, Floyd, 126
Nova Fund, 167, 188–89
number theory, 34, 69–70
Obama, Barack, 276
Ohio State University, 275
Olsen, Greg, 79–80, 96–97
One Up on Wall Street (Lynch), 163
“On the Transitivity of Holonomy Systems” (Simons), 20
Open Marriage (O’Neill), 36
origins of the universe, xviii, 287, 323–26, 350

OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration), 234
Oswald Veblen Prize, 38
Owl’s Nest, 228, 275, 288–89, 295
Pacific Investment Management Company (PIMCO), 163–64, 309
PaineWebber, 155–56
pairs trade, 129–30, 272
Paloma Partners, 138
partial differential equations (PDEs), 21, 26–28
pattern analysis, 5, 24, 45, 57, 123–24
Patterson, Nick
background of, 147–48
at IDA, 148
Patterson, Nick, at Renaissance, xv, 145–50, 202
Brown and Mercer, 169, 179–80, 231
departure, 238
LTCM collapse and, 212–13
recruitment of, 168–69
tech bubble, 215–17
trading models, 149–50, 153, 193, 198
Paulson, John, 263–64, 309
PDT Partners, 258, 299
peer pressure, 200
Peled, Abe, 178
Pellegrini, Paolo, 263–64
Penavic, Kresimir, 145, 153
Pence, Mike, 285
Pepsi, 129–30, 272
Perl, 155
“Piggy Basket,” 57–59
Plateau, Joseph, 27
points, 190
poker, 15, 18, 25, 29, 69, 94, 127, 163
polynomials, 93
pool operator, 86
portfolio insurance, 126
portfolio theory, 30, 92
presidential election of 2016, xviii, 279–91, 294–95, 302
presidential election of 2020, 304–5
primal therapy, 36–37
Primerica, 123
Princeton/Newport Partners, 128
Princeton University, 28, 31, 37, 82, 141
Priorities USA, 283

“Probabilistic Models for and Prediction of Stock Market Behavior” (Simons), 28–30
Procter & Gamble, 132
programming language, 155, 191–92, 233–34
p-values, 144
Qatar, 261–62
quantitative trading, 30, 39, 61, 124, 126–27, 211–12, 256, 308–15
quants, xvii, 126–27, 199, 204, 256
Quantum Fund, 164–65, 333
racism, 13–14, 278, 294, 295–96, 303
Rand, Ayn, 277
Reagan, Ronald, 65, 105
Recession of 1969–1970, 123
regression line, 83–84
Reichardt, Louis, 323
Renaissance Institutional Diversified Alpha Fund, 319
Renaissance Institutional Diversified Global Equity Fund, 319
Renaissance Institutional Equities Fund (RIEF), 246–52, 254, 255, 257–61, 264–65, 271,
284, 300, 316, 319
Renaissance Institutional Futures Fund (RIFF), 252, 265, 271
Renaissance Riviera, 227–28
Renaissance Technologies Corporation
Ax and Straus establish Axcom, 78–83
Ax joins, 51–52
Ax’s departure, 102–3
Baum joins, 45–46, 49
Baum’s departure, 63–64
Berlekamp’s departure, 117–18
Brown and Mercer join, 169, 179–80
compensation, 200–201, 227, 228–29, 233
expansion into stock investing, 157–58
financial crisis of 2007–2008, 255–62, 263–64
GAM Investments, 153–54
headquarters, 186, 205
hiring and interview process, 202–3, 233
Laufer joins, 109, 141–44
Mercer and political blowback, 291–305
Mercer steps down as co-CEO, 301–2, 319
name change to, 61
nondisclosure agreements, xv–xvi, 133, 201, 238, 241, 252–53
Straus’s departure, 158
tax avoidance investigation of 2014, 226–27
“the Sheiks,” 156–57
timeline of key events, xii

trading models, 138–40, 156–57, 161, 203–5, 212–13, 221–22, 272–74
Volfbeyn and Belopolsky, 238, 241, 242, 252–54
Reserve Primary Fund, 172–73
Resnik, Phil, 176
retracements, 203–4
reversion trading strategy, 95–96
Revolution Books, 133–34
Riemann hypothesis, 65
Rival, Anita, 140
Robertson, Julian, 217
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 249–50
Robinson, Arthur, 231, 276
Rockefeller, Nelson, 33, 71
rocket scientists, 126
Romney, Mitt, 279, 290
Rosenberg, Barr, 127
Rosenfeld, Eric, 209
Rosenshein, Joe, 16–17, 41
Rosinsky, Jacqueline, 168
Royal Bank of Bermuda, 51
Rubio, Marco, 279
Russian cryptography, 23–26, 46–49, 148
Russian financial crisis of 1998, 210
St. John Island, 240
Sandia High School, 169
Scholes, Myron, 209
Schumer, Chuck, 268–69
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 275
Schwarzman, Stephen, 304
SCL Group, 279
script, 191–92
second order, 190
Securities and Exchange Commission, 290
Security Analysis (Graham and Dodd), 127
September 11 attacks (2001), 262–63
Sessions, Jeff, 290, 291
sexism, 168, 176–77, 207
Shaio, Victor, 21, 38–39, 40
Shannon, Claude, 90–91, 127
Sharpe, William F., 167
Sharpe ratio, 167, 218, 223–24, 245
Shaw, David, 131, 133–35, 137, 211–12
short, 131, 209, 308

short-term trading, 97, 100, 107–9
Shteyngart, Gary, 312–13
Siegel, Martin, 106
Silber, Mark, 100, 102, 201, 255, 294
Simons, Barbara Bluestein, 18–19, 20–21, 25, 34–37, 61, 159–60
Simons, Elizabeth, 20–21, 31
Simons, James, xi
academic career of. See Simons, James, academic and scientific career of
appearance of, 1, 44
author’s attempts to interview, xv–xvi
deaths of sons, 159–60, 238–40, 245–46
early business ventures of, 21, 26, 38–39
early life of, xix, 9–10
East Setauket estate, 227, 241
education of. See Simons, James, education of
eightieth birthday of, 320
first trades of, 19–20
interest in mathematics, 9–10, 12, 15
marriage to Barbara, 18–19, 20–21
marriage to Marilyn, 37–38, 39–40
mathematics awards of, 38
MIT lecture of 2019, 325–26
at Monemetrics. See Monemetrics
philanthropic activity of, xviii, 268–69, 287–88, 307–8, 321, 323–25
political views of, 283–88, 320–21
at Renaissance. See Simons, James, at Renaissance
roots of investing style, 121–23
secrecy of, xvi, 154–55, 208–9
self-confidence of, 4, 10, 14, 15, 41, 44, 55
smoking habit of, 1, 60, 80, 91, 94, 97, 114, 234–35, 249–50, 251, 297
South American trip, 16–17
timeline of key events, xii
Simons, James, academic and scientific career of, xix, 1, 26–28, 67
Harvard, 21–22, 23
IDA and code-breaking, 23–26, 28–29, 30–32, 35, 45, 81, 93–94
MIT, 20–21
Princeton, 37
Stony Brook, 33–36, 40, 45, 94
theoretical mathematics, 20–21, 26–28, 37–38, 39–40
UCLA, 36–37
Simons, James, at Renaissance
Ax and, 34, 68–69, 99–103, 107
Ax and Straus establish Axcom, 78–83

Berlekamp and, 2–3, 4, 93–95, 109–10, 113–14, 116–18, 124
client presentations, 249–50
financial crisis, 257–61, 263–64
Magerman and, 181–82, 186–87, 234–35, 237, 296–99
management and leadership, 199–203, 208, 230–31, 237, 238, 240–43, 245–46
Mercer and political blowback, 296–99, 300–301
Patterson and, 145–46, 149, 151, 155
tech bubble, 216–17
trading models and strategies, xvii–xix, 2–4, 5, 28–30, 39, 44–45, 49–59, 67–68, 81,
107–18, 124–25, 138–40, 142–51, 156–57, 161, 166, 193, 197–99, 203–5, 221–22, 234,
274, 308–9, 316–17
trading success, xvi–xvii
trading vs. mathematics, 2
Simons, James, education of, 2, 12–13
Berkeley, 3, 17–19, 20, 38, 68–69
Harvard, 15, 17
MIT, 14–16, 17
Simons, Marcia, 10–13, 257
Simons, Marilyn Hawrys, 37–38, 39–40, 53, 60, 239–40, 268, 269, 283, 285
Simons, Matthew, 10–13, 21, 40, 53
Simons, Nathaniel, 53, 158–59, 283
Simons, Nicholas, 60, 159, 239–40, 246
Simons, Paul, 61, 159–60, 240
Simons Foundation, 321, 323–24
Simons Observatory, 324–25
Simons Simplex Collection, 268
Singer, Isadore, 15
Singularity Hub, 312
slippage, 107, 149–50
smart beta, 315
Smith, Adam, 124
Soros, George, xvi, 3, 164, 165, 217, 263, 267, 302, 326, 333
Soviet–Afghan War, 63
Sowell, Thomas, 293
speech recognition, 47, 48, 169, 172, 173, 174, 178–79, 189, 202, 222
Spergel, David, 324
Stanford University, 133, 185, 277
Starbucks, 166
“states,” 29–30, 47–48
statistical arbitrage, 131–32, 133, 166–67, 256
Steinhardt, Paul, 325
stochastic differential equations, 81–83
stock market crash of 1987, 97, 126, 256–57

stock market downturn of 2002, 225–26
Stokes’ theorem, 14
Stony Brook University, 33–36, 40, 71–72, 73–74, 268, 302
story stocks, 162
Stotler Group, 113–14
Straus, Faye, 74
Straus, Sandor, xi
at Axcom, 78–83, 101–2, 107, 157, 158
background of, 73–74
at Monemetrics, 74–76
trading models, 74–76, 81–86, 95–96, 97, 99, 107–12, 143, 157, 312
Stuyvesant High School, 68
style investing, 315
subprime home mortgages, 255, 261, 309
Sullivan, Dennis, 158–59, 240, 250–51
Sun Microsystems, 134
super PACs, 277, 305
Sussman, Donald, 133–34, 135, 137–40
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 127
Tartaglia, Nunzio, 130–32, 133
Taylor, Maxwell D., 31
technical analysis, 29–30, 74–77, 96, 127–29
Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (Murphy), 96
technical trading, 30, 108, 119, 123–24
Temple, Shirley, 11
Thaler, Richard, 152
Thatcher, Margaret, 52
Thiel, Peter, 288–89
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, 172
Thorp, Edward, 30, 97–98, 127–29, 130, 163
tick data, 112
Toll, John, 33
tradeable effects, 111
trading errors, 166
trading signals, 3, 83–84, 203–5, 246–47, 312
trenders, 73
trend following, 96, 100
Trump, Donald, xviii, 281–94, 302, 304–5
Trump, Ivanka, 281
Trump, Melania, 285
Trump National Golf Club, 282
Tsai, Gerald, Jr., 123
Turing, Alan (Turing machine), 3, 148

“turtles,” 125
Tversky, Amos, 152
twenty-four-hour effect, 109
20th Century Fox, 10–11
Two Sigma Investments, 310, 312
Tykhe Capital, 256
United Airlines, 166
United Church of Christ, 87–88
United Fruit Company, 19
University of California, Berkeley, 3, 17–19, 20, 38, 68–69, 92–93, 95
University of California, Irvine, 81
University of California, Los Angeles, 36–37
University of Cambridge, 147
University of Chicago, 30, 72, 256
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 300–301
University of Illinois, 171
University of New Mexico, 169–70
University of Pennsylvania, 176, 185, 236, 270
University of Rochester, 169
value style of investing, 96
Vietnam War, 31–32, 48
Villani, Dario, 308
Vinik, Jeffrey, 163
Volcker, Paul, 65
Volfbeyn, Pavel, 238, 241, 242, 252–54
von Neumann, John, 67
Wadsworth, Jack, Jr., 89
Wallace, Mike, 13
Wall Street (movie), 106
Wall Street Journal, 57, 76, 122, 124, 128, 146, 172, 198, 275, 294, 303, 318
Walters, Barbara, 13
Wander, Wolfgang, 300–301, 300n
Ward, Kelli, 304
WarGames (movie), 192
Washington Post, 282
weekend effect, 109–10
Weinberger, Peter, 201, 233–34
Weinstein, Boaz, 299
Welch, Lloyd, 46–48
West Meadow Beach, 34, 235
Wheeler, Langdon, 106
white supremacism, 292–93, 299–300
Whitney, Glen, at Renaissance, 235–36

compensation, 200–201, 229
departure, 262
job interviews, 233
Kononenko and, 241, 242–43, 262
Mercer and, 231–32, 235
Wild One, The (movie), 17
Wiles, Andrew, 69–70
Witten, Edward, 38
World Bank, 56
WorldCom, 226
World Trade Center mosque controversy, 278
Yale University, 176
Yang, Chen Ning, 33
Yau, Shing-Tung, 35
Yiannopoulos, Milo, 300, 302
Zeno’s paradoxes, 12

ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Gregory Zuckerman is the author of The Greatest Trade
Ever and The Frackers, and is a Special Writer at the
Wall Street Journal. At the Journal, Zuckerman writes
about financial firms, personalities and trades, as well as
hedge funds and other investing and business topics.
He’s a three-time winner of the Gerald Loeb award, the
highest honor in business journalism. Zuckerman also
appears regularly on CNBC, Fox Business and other
networks and radio stations around the globe.

W at’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news
about this author.

Sign up now.

* The 5 percent management fee had been determined
in 1988, when Straus told Simons he needed about
$800,000 to run the firm’s computer system and pay for
other operational costs—a figure that amounted to 5
percent of the $16 million managed at the time. The fee
seemed about right to Simons, who kept it as the firm
grew.

* Patterson had more reason for paranoia than even he
realized; around the same time, another investor from
Long Island, Bernard Madoff, was crafting history’s
largest Ponzi scheme.

* It wasn’t that the company had a problem hiring
women. Like other trading firms, Renaissance didn’t
receive many resumes from female scientists or
mathematicians. It’s also the case that Simons and
others didn’t go out of their way to recruit women or
minorities.

* When asked to comment, Bannon said there are
“errors of fact” in this description of events surrounding
the election and his interactions with the Mercers, though
he wouldn’t specify the inaccuracies. “Dude, it’s not my
fucking book,” he said in an email.

* That would be yours truly.

* On Wander’s Facebook page: “If you send me a friend
request, tell me how we met and clear your page of FOX
talking points, thanks!”

* Fees are charged by the Medallion fund to its investors,
which in most years represents the firm’s own
employees and former employees.

* Gross returns and Medallion profits are estimates—the
actual number could vary slightly depending on when the
annual asset fee is charged, among other things.
Medallion’s profits are before the fund’s various
expenses.

* All returns are after fees.

* Returns have fallen in recent years as Soros has
stopped investing money for others.

* Buffett averaged 62% gains investing his personal
money from 1951 to 1957, starting with less than
$10,000, and saw average gains of 24.3% for a
partnership managed from 1957 to 1969.

* Mercer is no longer Renaissance’s co-CEO but he
remains a senior employee of the firm.

